
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : //books . google . com/| 



^-^^ 



■^i 



lA 



«•&gt;&gt; 



The works of Daniel Defoe 

Daniel Defoe, Howard Maynadier 



.»SlTVo^ 






'^^hMf.^ 




30gle 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE WORKS OF 

DANIEL DEFOE 

IN SIXTEEN VOLUMES 
LIMITED EDITION 

TTIMITED for sale in America and Europe to 
One Thousand Numbered and Registered SetSy 
qf which this is Number J..,!!.:.". 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Googk 



THE PLUNDER 



A Jine necklace of pearly and the value of 100 lix- 
dollars in nwney Vxon 79 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE WORKS OF DANIEL DEFOE 

VOLUME FIVE 

MEMOIRS 

OF 

A CAVALIER 

OK 

A MILITARY JOURNAL OF THE WARS 

IN GERMANY AND THE WARS 

IN ENGLAND 

WITH THE author's PRBPACB, AND AN INTRODUCTION BY 

G. H. MAYNADIER, Ph.D. 

DKPARTMENT OF BNOU8H, HARVARD UNITBRSITY 




NEW YORK 
GEORGE D. SPROUL 



MCHIII 



Digitized by 



Google 



I "103 
V.3 



Digitized by 



Google 



odoo 
(■?'*■ 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

THE PLUNDER Fronttspieci 

SACKING OF MAGDEBURG BY TILLY^S ARMY . Pag$ 50 
A CERTAIN NOBLEMAN AND THE CAVAUER 

DISCUSS THE WAR „ 156 

AFTER THE BATTLE OF NASSBY • . • • ,, 814 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION 

TWENTY-ONE days after Duncan Camp- 
bell — that is, on the twenty-first of May,. 
1720 — appeared the Memoirs of a Cava- 
lier. Its title, like the titles of most of 
Defoe's books, was too long to be easily remembered, 
being in full : Memoirs of a Cavalier : or a Military 
Journal qf the Wars in Gemumy^ amd the Wars in 
England. From the Year 163S^ to the Year 16^8. 
Written threescore years ago^ by an English Gentle- 
man, who served Jirst in the Army of Gustavus AdoU 
phuSf the Glorious King qf Sweden^ tiU his Death, 
and after that in the Royal Army qf King Charles 
the First, from the Beginning of the Rebellion to the 
End qf the War. 

From the day the Memoirs appeared, there has 
been doubt as to their authorship. Defoe himself, 
in the preface to the first edition, declared it " very 
probable these Memorials were written many years 
ago,^ by a gentleman of quality who had taken part 
in the wars of which he wrote. The publisher of 
the second edition, which came out at Leeds twenty 
years or more after the first,^ evidently regarded De- 
foe's statement as true, for he declared that the 
Memoirs could hardly be fiction ; they must be fact. 

^ The second edition was published without date. 

[ix] 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION 

**No man," he said in his introduction, "could have 
given a description of his retreat fixim Marston 
Moor to Rochdale, and from thence over the moors 
to the north, in so apt and proper terms, and in so 
exact a manner, unless he had really travelled over 
the very ground he describes.'* And then the pub- 
lisher, seeking to discover who the author was, de- 
cided that the identification would accord with the 
preface of the first edition, if he made the author 
out to be "Andrew Newport, Esq., second son to 
Richard Newport, of High Ercall, Esq., which 
Richard was created Lord Newport, October 14, 
164i%'" So likely did this identification seem that a 
London edition of the Memoirs in 1792 bore on its 
titlepage, " Memoirs of the Honorable Col. Andrew 
Newport, a Shropshire Gentleman. . . ."" Even so 
recent and careful a biographer of Defoe as Mr. 
William Lee seems to have believed that Defoe, in 
the Memoirs of a Cavalier^ only edited and en* 
larged a manuscript from the hand of this Colonel 
Newport.^ 

There have always been those, however, who have 
doubted whether any one but Defoe wrote so much 
as a paragraph of the Memoirs. The question of 
authorship is important. If the book is not a true 
history, it would appear at first sight to be a 
stronger proof of Defoe's versatility in fiction than 
anything else from his pen. In his other narratives 

^ At least the foot-note on page 330, vol L, of Mr. Lee's 
Daniel Defoe, London, 1869, implies his belief in Newport's 
authorship of the original manuscript 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION 

he keeps almost always among the lower and the mid* 
die classes. In the Cavalier j the hero is the son of a 
coimtry gentleman of consequence who was raised to 
the peerage. The hero, moreover, is an Oxford 
graduate, who travels with gentlemen abroad, and 
who is at ease in the presence of kings and queens. 
It would seem, therefore, that one of two things 
must be true of the Memoirs. Either the book was 
merely edited by Defoe, or it proves him to have 
had greater imagination and a wider knowledge of 
society than he has commonly received credit for. 

I have already said that in Defoe^s own preface to 
the first edition, we find the foundation on which 
has been reared the whole structiu^e of argument 
that the book was written by a gentleman who 
served in the wars of Gustavus Adolphus and 
Charles I. As evidence for the antiquity of " these 
Memorials,*^ Defoe announced that the publishers 
had ^^ had them in their possession . • . above twenty 
years,^ and that they had been found in the closet of 
" one of King William's secretaries of state.*" ** Al- 
most all the facts,^ Defoe goes on to say, " especially 
those of moment, are confirmed for their general 
part by all the writers of those times. If they are 
here embellished with particulars, which are no- 
where else to be found, • • . that it is that must 
recommend this work to all the men of sense and 
judgment that read if 

The argument of confirmation by ** the writers of 
those times'* impressed Mr. Lee, whose Dani^/ Dtfoe^ 
published in 1869, is in many respects still the au- 
[xi] 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION 

thoritative biography of our author. Yet when we 
look mto the ai'gument, we find it hardly convinc- 
ing. The book is ^^ based upon historical facts,^ 
says Mr. Lee, "otherwise history would have con* 
fated it.^'i Soare J Tale of Two Citka BXiA Quentin 
Dufward based upon historical facts. History can- 
not confate them in the main, for in the main they 
are true to history. It can confate them in some 
details, though, and so it can the Memoirs of a Cav- 
alier. For example, in the introduction to tliis 
book in a recent edition of Defoe^s Romances Ofnd 
Narratives, Mr. Aitken says, ^* Numerous errors in 
the account of the Civil War . . . have been kindly 
pointed out to me by Mr. Firth. Thus the account of 
the battle of Marston Moor — in which the Cavalier 
took an active part — is entirely at variance with all 
authorities. The description of the distribution of 
the commands in the Royalist army is wrong in 
nearly every point. Newcastle had no command; 
Prince Rupert commanded the right and not the 
left wing, and was beaten altogether out of the field 
at once ; Goring commanded the victorious left wing 
and not the main battle. The contest is apparently 
made to begin in the early morning, instead of at 
five or six o^clock in the afternoon.^ And so forth 
and so on. Here surely is not the exact historical 
knowledge of an eye-witness. 

On the contrary, the knowledge of the campaigns 
in which the Cavalier engaged seems to me rather the 
knowledge of a student of history. There is also the 

[xii] 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION 

kind of knowledge manifest in the Memoirs^ which a 
dose questioner might get from men who had really 
engaged in the battles mentioned. A quotation from 
Mr. Whitten's recent Daniel Defoe in The West- 
minster Biographies throws some light on the way in 
which Defoe may have got such particular knowledge. 
Speaking of Defoe^s boyish inquisitiveness, which 
probably went even beyond that of most wide-awake 
lads, Mr. Whitten says that in Colonel Jacque^ 
"Defoe is doubtless giving us a page of self-por- 
traiture when he makes the Colonel recall his sharp 
acquisitiveness as a youth. Says he : — 

' In this way of Talk I was always upon the Inquiry^ 
asking Questions of things done in Publick^ as well as in 
Private ; particularly, I lov'd to talk with . . . Soldiers 
about • . • the great • • • Battles • . . that any of 
them had been in, and, as I never forgot anything they 
told me, I could ... in a few Years, give almost as 
good an Account of the Dutch War, • • • the Battles in 
Flanders^ the taking of Maesiricht, and the like, as any 
of those who had been there ; and this made those old 
Soldiers . . . love to talk with me too, and to tell me 
all the Stories they could think of, and that not only of 
the Wars then going on, but also of the Wars of OUvers 
time, the death of King Charles I. and the like.' "^ 

This will account for many of the details in Defoe^s 
narrative. That these details would be related with 
an car of reality is no more than we should expect 
from the man who imagined all the minutiae of 

1 Wilfred Whitten, Daniel Defoe, London, 1900. p. 6. 
[xiii] 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION 

Robinson Crusoe^s housekeeping. Indeed, when we 
put together Defoe^s peculiarly [circumstantial im- 
agination and the information that his indefati- 
gable questioning might have drawn forth from old 
soldiers, the wonder is that the Memcira do not 
give us even more individual details. The publisher 
of the Leeds edition hit upon the most persuasively 
real part of the book, when he said that no one could 
have related the wanderings over the moors and hills 
of the North, after the battle of Marston Moor, 
" unless he had really travelled over the very ground 
he describes.'' This is exactly what Defoe had done. 
As a spy of the government he made various trips 
through England, and into Scotland, all of which 
impressed themselves upon his mind, as we may see 
in his T(mr through the Whole Island of Great 
Britain. Whoever will read in that work Defoe's 
letters from Yorkshire, Lancashire, and Westmore- 
land, with their occasional references to the Civil 
War, will see no reason why the adventures after 
the battle of Marston Moor should not have been 
entirely Defoe's invention. And this, it should be 
remembered, which may have been largely coloured 
by personal experience, is far and away the most 
vivid part of the Memoirs. All things considered, 
then, the argument of historical corroboration is not 
enough to convince us that there was a manuscript 
basis for the Memoirs of a Cavalier. 

Mr. Lee made a scarcely stronger argument for 
such a basis when he said that in ^^ stile and diction, 
. . . there are occasionally whole paragraphs that 
[xiv] 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION 

scarcely afford a trace of Defoe^s pen ; although, 
generally, he appears to have revised, and often re- 
written and extended the manuscript.''^ In other 
words, there are traces of Defoe's style almost every- 
where in the book. If the mark of Defoe is so nearly 
omnipresent, could we not account for the occasional 
absence of it by the difference between the substance 
of this book and that of most of Defoe's stories ? In 
these, Defoe was engaged chiefly with the shrewd, 
practical discussion of everyday affairs, it mattered 
not whether among thieves and harlots in Newgate, 
or with castaways and explorers in remote parts of 
the world. When he passes from such matters to 
the discussion of famous campaigns and £ui*opean 
statesmanship, it is only natural that some of his 
mannerisms of style should disappear. 

The strongest argument, perhaps, for a manu- 
script basis for the Memoirs^ is another one ad- 
vanced by Mr. Lce.^ In corroboration of Defoe's 
statement in the preface, regarding a manuscript 
long in his possession, Mr. Lee calls attention to the 
fact that Defoe had referred to what may have been 
the same manuscript six years before the appearance 
of the Memoirs. In 1714, Defoe published a pam- 
phlet entitled The Scots Naium and Union vindi- 
cated. One of the points in favor of the " Scots 
nation " was that many of its gentlemen had served 
with distinction under the noble king, Gustavus 
Adolphus. In proof of this statement Defoe ad- 
duced a manuscript which had been in his ^* Hands 

1 Op. eit., p. 333. « Op. ctt., p. 334. 

[XV] 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION 

many Years, neither is it to be contradicted^ the 
Histories of those Times making frequent mention 
of all** the gentlemen^s names. It would not be 
inconsistent with the character of Defoe, had he in- 
vented this manuscript to strengthen by concrete 
proof the general testimony of history in favour of 
the Scots. Nor would it be preposterous to suppose 
that he invented it for another reason, namely, to 
pave the way for the Memoirs of a Cavalier^ already 
partially composed. This work must have been 
written before Duncan CampbeUy the publication of 
which was only three weeks before its own. Indeed, 
it would seem likely that the Cavalier was complete 
before Robinson Crusoe, and how much sooner no 
one can tell. If, however, one thinks these supposi- 
tions too fanciful ; if one will agree with Mr. Lee, 
that a manuscript, for years in Defoe^s possession, 
was the basis of the Memoirs ; then, after all, one 
need take it as the basis of only part of the book. 
Mr. Lee himself said, Defoe^s *^ mind as well as his 
hand is much more perceptible in the latter part 
. • • than in the former ; and, as he was better ac- 
quainted with the geography and physical character 
of his own country than that of Germany, this part 
of the narrative is often very characteristic of his 
genius.**^ In short, whether or not a manuscript ac- 
count of the German Wars supplied some material 
for the Memoirs of a Cavalier^ there seems every 
reason to believe that the portion of the book which 
dealt with the English Civil War was taken from 

1 Op. tU.^ p. 83S. 
[xvi] 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION 

nothing but the records of history, anecdotes current 
in Defoe^s boyhood, and Defoe^s own imagination. 

It would be easier to believe Defoe an editor of 
the Memoirs rather than their author, if their 
authorship could be fixed on some one else. It never 
has been. We have seen that the Leeds publisher 
of the second edition supposed the author to be 
Andrew Newport of Shropshire, and that subsequent 
editors and biographers, including even Mr. Lee, 
have been more or less inclined to share this opinion. 
Since Mr. Lee wrote, however, it has been proved 
conclusively that Colonel Andrew Newport could not 
have been the author of the Meimnrs. It is un- 
necessary to point out the omission from them of all 
reference to such family matters as would naturally 
creep into a history whose first form was a sort of 
diary. Sufficient proof that Newport did not write 
them is found in the fact that he was not bom till 
1623, and did not matriculate at Christ Church, Ox- 
ford, till 1640. It would thus have been impossible 
for him to have those experiences in the Thirty Years' 
War which Defoe's Cavalier, bom in 1608, might 
have had. Nor is there any indication that Andrew 
Newport fought in the Civil War, though we have 
record that his father and elder brother both took 
part in it, and that his father's house, High Ercall, 
was a garrison which long held out for the king. We 
can be pretty sure that had Andrew Newport actively 
assisted the royalist cause, we should have knowledge 
of his doing so ; for there is record of his rendering 
the cause service under the Protectorate, when he 
[ xvii ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION 

did his best to raise money and to influence public 
opinion for Charles II. And so it is certain that 
Newport did not write even a first rough draught of 
the Memoirs. No one else but Defoe has ever been 
seriously considered as their author. His claim to 
authorship, therefore, would seem unchallenged if 
Newport^s is eliminated. 

If we ask for further proof that Defoe himself 
wrote the Memoirs^ we can find it in the contradic- 
tion between dates of the preface and of the con- 
clusion. Asserting that he has tried his best to find 
the name of the author, Defoe says in his preface 
that his only discovery was a memorandum at- 
tached to the manuscript (and written by its former 
owner) which read as follows : — 

^' Memorandum. 

'^I found this manuscript among my father's writings^ 
and I understand that he got them as plunder^ at^ 
or after^ the fight at Worcester, where he served as 

major of 's regiment of horse on the side of the 

Parliament. I. K." 

If the manuscript was captured " at, or after,'' the 
battle of Worcester, it is manifestly impossible that 
its author should refer, as he does, to the Restora- 
tion. The simplest explanation of the inconsistency 
is to assume that Defoe wrote the memorandum as 
well as the rest of the preface, forgetting for the 
moment what was in the body of the Memoirs. Of 
course, once Defoe's authorship of the memorandum 
[ xviii ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION 

is admitted, down tumbles the whole fabric of argu- 
ment based on his claim of manuscript authority 
for his history. 

It has been said that the Memoirs qf a Cavalier 
is not so religious in tone as most of Defoe^s nar- 
ratives. Though this is true, mention of religion, 
so far as there is any, is in Defoe^s usual manner. 
The Cavalier, who has not given thought to serious 
things in his youth, is inclined to give more heed to 
them as he grows older. Such is the common way 
with Defoe's characters. Godless at first, they be- 
come in the end God-fearing. And the Cavalier 
concludes with a half-religious, half-superstitious 
enumeration of various coincidences, with reflections 
upon them, which is just what we should expect 
from Defoe. 

I have said above that if we take the Memoirs 
qf a Cavalier to be largely fiction, we shall find it 
apparently different from most of Defoe's stories. 
The fact that it introduces us to a higher class of 
society than Defoe usually takes us into, would seem, 
at first sight, an argument against Defoe's author- 
ship. If we look at the book closely, however, we 
shall see that in reality it is not much out of Defoe's 
usual manner. Though the hero is bom and brought 
up a gentleman ; though he introduces us to gen- 
erals, prime ministers, and kings and queens of 
France, Sweden, and England; it is notable that 
he never entertains us at the country-houses of his 
noble Englisli friends and relatives. In other words, 
the Cavalier is not too elegant a gentleman for 
[xix] 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION 

Defoe to imagine. To be sure, we catch more 
glimpses of high life in the Memoirs than in any 
other of Defoe^s works, Roxana not excepted, but 
they are only such glimpses as Defoe^s own experi- 
ence could give us. He himself was not at home 
in fashionable drawing-rooms, but like his Cavalier, 
he did know the audience-chambers of ministers 
and even of monarchs. 

Then, again, there is no more characterisation in 
the Memoirs than in Defoe^s other stories. The 
Cavalier is brave ; he shows by his treatment of the 
Italian courtesan that he is instinctively refined; 
but on the whole, he is shadowy. So are Gustavus 
Adolphus and Charles I. and Prince Rupert. Com- 
pare them with Scott's Louis XI. or Elizabeth, and 
you will see how little power Defoe had to give 
life to his historical characters. Rupert was im- 
petuous, we are told again and again, but that does 
not make him alive ; the two monarchs are said to 
have the characteristics which history gives them, 
but they seldom do anjrthing individual except 
" smile.^ When the Cavalier told Gustavus Adol- 
phus that, had he but marched twenty miles into 
Silesia, half the people would have run out of Vienna 
in fear, the king replied, "smiling,** **I have no de- 
sign to trouble them, it is the Protestant countries 
I must be for.** And when the Cavalier asked 
Charles I. if he might go among " his loyal subjects 
about Shrewsbury? *Yes,* says the king, smiling, 
^ I intend you shall* and I design to go with you 
myself.* ** 

[«] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



INTRODUCTION 

It is odd that critics have not generally remarked 
on the frequency of this smile among Defoe^s char* 
acters. It denotes shrewdness, dry humour, and any 
sort of kindly feeling ; and it may appear on the 
face of a king, or of the naked Englishman whom 
Captain Singleton found in the interior of Africa, 
or of William the Quaker whom the same ad- 
venturer subsequently picked up off the coast of 
America, or of Godolphin, when he received Defoe 
after Harley's retirement from office,^ Defoe'^s per- 
sonages know scarcely any other change of ex- 
pression. And so it is another proof of Defoe^s 
authorship of the Memoirs of a Cavalier^ that the 
principal means of making the King of Sweden and 
the King of England seem alive and individual is 
to make them smile. 

In general effect Defoe^s rapidly moving narra- 
tives are so much alike, that what you say of one 
you may say of all, unless, as in this case, there is 
some particular question of literary or political his- 
tory. Having dwelt on the matter of authorship, 
I shall say nothing more, therefore, in regard to the 
Memoirs of a Cavalier^ except to sum up this dis- 
cussion. When the question of authorship is con- 
sidered along with the questions of style and ability 
in the art of fiction, we find that there is no need 
of assuming any manuscript basis for even a page of 
the Memoirs. In view, however, of Defoe's saying 
some six years before their publication that he had 
long possessed a manuscript which mentioned Scotch 
^ See Defoe^s AppMl to Honour and Juttiee. 
[xxi] 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION 

gentlemen who fought under Gustavus Adolphus, 
it is possible that there was some slight manuscript 
basis for the first part of the Memoirs. It is highly 
probable that the second part, which dealt with the 
English Civil War, had no source but well-known 
histories, stories picked up by Defoe in his boyhood 
from old soldiers and other survivors of the War, and 
Defoe^s circumstantial, matter-of-fact imagination.^ 

G. H. Matnadier. 



1 When this introduction was ready for the press* I came 
upon an article in the Ath0nanMn of May 9th, 1903, which 
seeks to prove that Robert Harley, Earl of Oxford, wrote 
the Memoin of a Cavalier as well as the first part of EoUn- 
jron Cru90€, The suggestion that Harley vrrote part of Robinson 
Crtuoe has been made before, but the suggestion of his author- 
ship of the Memoin of a Cavalier is, so far as I know, new. 
Late discoveries regarding Mr$. Veal and the Most Surprising 
Apparition seen near Launceston show that established opin- 
ions regarding Defoe's woi^ may suddenly be overthrown. 
Nevertheless, there is nothing in the article just mentioned to 
make me change in the least the opinions I have stated above. 
If style proves anjrthing, then one must say that if Harley wrote 
the Memoirs, he wrote also Defoe's Appeal to Honour and Jus- 
tice and Colonel Jacque and A New Voyage Bound the World. 
Indeed, if we admit Harley's authorship of any one of these 
works, I see no reason why we should not go so far as those 
who maintain that Bacon wrote Shakspere, and declare boldly 
that Harley wrote Defoe. 

One of the arguments to prove Harley*s authorship, in the 
article I speak of, is based on statements of Defoe, regarding 
both books in question, that he was an editor and not their 
author. A student of Defoe must make up his mind once and 
for all that no importance is to be attached to such statements ; 
without external evidence, one can never know whether Defoe 
was telling the truth about himself or lying. It has been pretty 
conclusively proved within ten years that he was telling the 
[xxii] 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION 

truth when he declared that he had not invented the two re- 
markable stories of apparitions which I have just referred to. 
On the other hand, the recent publication of some of his 
secret letters to Harley^ shows that in regard to his public 
life, he was even a more unscrupulous liar than he has been 
supposed. 

&gt; T. BatMon, D^ot and UarUyf EnglUh HitUnrieal Rwiew^ zr., p. 238, ff. 



[ xxiii ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST 
EDITION 

jA S an evidence that ^tis very probable these 
/^k Memorials were written many years ago, 

/ " ^ k the persons now concerned in the publi- 
J^ J^ cation assure the reader that they have 
had them in their possession finished, as they now 
appear, above twenty years ; that they were so long 
ago found by great accident, among other valuable 
papers, in the closet of an eminent public minister, 
of no less figure than one of King William^s secreta- 
ries of state. 

As it is not proper to trace them any farther, so 
neither is there any need to trace them at all, to 
give reputation to the story related, seeing the 
actions here mentioned have a sufficient sanction 
from all the histories of the times to which they 
relate, with this addition, that the admirable man- 
ner of relating them, and the wonderful variety of 
incidents with which they are beautified in the course 
of a private gentleman^s story, add such delight in 
the reading, and give such a lustre, as well to the 
accounts themselves as to the person who was the 
actor, that no story, we believe, extant in the world 
ever came abroad with such advantage. 

It must naturally give some concern in the read- 
ing that the name of a person of so much gallantry 
[xxv] , 



Digitized by 



Google 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 

and honour, and so many wa3rs valuable to the 
world, should be lost to the readers. We assure 
them no small labour has been thrown away upon 
the inquiry, and all we have been able to arrive to 
of discovery in this affair is, that a memorandum 
was found with this manuscript, in these words, but 
not signed by any name, only the two letters of a 
name, which gives us no light into the matter, which 
memoir was as follows : — 

Memorandum. 

^'I fomid this manuscript among my father's writ- 
ings, and I understand that he got them as plunder, at, 
or after, the fight at Worcester, where he served as 

major of 's regiment of horse on the side of the 

Parliament. I. K." 

As this has been of no use but to terminate the 
inquiry after the person, so, however, it seems most 
naturally to give an authority to the original of 
the work, viz., that it was bom of a soldier ; and 
indeed it is through every part related with so 
soldierly a style, and in the very language of the 
field, that it seems impossible anything but the very 
person who was present in every action here related 
could be the relater of them. 

The accounts of battles, the sieges, and the several 
actions of which this work is so full, are all recorded 
in the histories of those times; such as the great 
battle of Leipsic, the sacking of Magdeburg, the 
siege of Nuremberg, the passing the river Lech in 
Bavaria; such also as the battle of Eineton, or 
[xxvij 



Digitized by 



Google 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 

Edgehill, the battles of Newbury, Marston Moor, 
and Naseby, and the like : they are all, we say, re- 
corded in other histories, and written by those who 
lived in those times, and perhaps had good authority 
for what they wrote. But do those relations give 
any of the beautiful ideas of things formed in this 
account? Have they one half of the circumstances 
and incidents of the actions themselves that this 
mane's eyes were witness to, and which his memory 
has thus preserved? He that has read the best 
accounts of those battles will be surprised to see the 
particulars of the story so preserved, so nicely and 
so agreeably described, and will confess what we 
allege, that the story is inimitably told ; and even 
the great actions of the glorious King Gustavus 
Adolphus receive a lustre from this man'^s relations 
which the world was never made sensible of befoi^, 
and which the present age has much wanted of late, 
in order to give their affections a turn in favour of 
his late glorious successor. 

In the story of our own country'*s unnatural wars, 
he carries on the same spirit. How effectually does 
he record the virtues and glorious actions of King 
Charles the First, at the same time that he fre- 
quently enters upon the mistakes of his Majesty'*s 
conduct, and of his friends, which gave his enemies 
all those fatal advantages against him, which ended 
in the overthrow of his armies, the loss of his crown 
and life, and the ruin of the constitution ! 

In all his accounts he does justice to his enemies, 
and honours the merit of those whose cause he 
fought against ; and many accounts recorded in his 
[ xxvii ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 

story, are not to be found even in the best histories 
of those times. 

What applause does he give to the gallantry of 
Sir Thomas Fairfax, to his modesty, to his conduct, 
under which he himself was subdued, and to the 
justice he did the king^s troops when they laididown 
their arms ! 

His description of the Scots troops in the begin- 
ning of the war, and the behaviour of the party 
under the Earl of Holland, who went over against 
them, are admirable ; and his censure of their con- 
duct, who pushed the king upon the quarrel, and 
then would not let him fight, is no more than what 
many of the king^s friends (though less knowing as 
soldiers) have often complained of 

In a word, this work is a confutation of many 
errors in all the writers upon the subject of our wars 
in England, and even in that extraordinary history 
written by the Earl of Clarendon ; but the editors 
were so just, that when, near twenty years ago, a 
person who had written a whole volume in folio, by 
way of answer to and confutation of Clarendon^s 
" History of the Rebellion,^ would have borrowed 
the clauses in this account, which clash with that 
history, and confront it, — we say the editors were 
so just as to refuse them. 

There can be nothing objected against the general 
ci*edit of this work, seeing its tiiith is established 
upon universal history; and almost all the facts, 
especially those of moment, are confirmed for their 
general part by all the writers of those times. If 
they are here embellished with particulars, which 
[xxviii ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 

are nowhere else to be found, that is the beauty we 
boast of; and that it is that must recommend this 
work to all the men of sense and judgment that 
read it. 

The only objection we find possible to make 
against this work is, that it is not carried on farther, 
or, as we may say finished, with the finishing the 
war of the time ; and this we complain of also. But 
then we complain of it as a misfortune to the world, 
not as a fault in the author ; for how do we know 
but that this author might carry it on, and have 
another part finished which might not fall into the 
same hands, or may still remain with some of his 
family, and which they cannot indeed publish, to 
make it seem anything perfect, for want of the other 
parts which we have, and which we have now made 
public ? Nor is it very improbable but that if any 
such farther part is in being, the publishing these 
two parts may occasion the proprietors of the third 
to let the world see it, and that by such a discovery 
the name of the person may also come to be known, 
which would, no doubt, be a great satisfaction to the 
reader as well as us. 

This, however, must be said, that if the same 
author should have written another part of this 
work, and carried it on to the end of those times, 
yet as the residue of those melancholy days, to the 
Restoration, were filled with the intrigues of govern- 
ment, the political management of illegal power, and 
the dissensions and factions of a people wl^o were 
then even in themselves but a faction, and that there 
was very little action in the field, it is more than 
[ xxix ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 

probable that our author, who was a man of arms, 
had little share in those things, and might not care 
to trouble himself with looking at them. 

But besides all this, it might happen that he 
might go abroad again at that time, as most of the 
gentlemen of quality, and who had an abhorrence 
for the power that then governed here, did. Nor 
are we certain that he might live to the end of that 
time, so we can give no account whether he had any 
share in the subsequent actions of that time. 

T is enough that we have the authorities above to 
recommend this part to us that is now published. 
The relation, we are persuaded, will recommend 
itself, and nothing more can be needful, because 
nothing more can invite than the story itself, which, 
when the reader enters into, he will find it very hard 
to get out of till he has gone through it. » 5 



[«X] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS of K CAVALIER 



THE FIRST PART 

IT may suiBoe the reader, without being very in- 
quisitive after my name, that I was bom in the 
coimty of Salop, in the year 1608, under the 
government of what star I was never astrologer 
enough to examine ; but the consequences of my life 
may allow me to suppose some extraordinary influence 
affected my birth. If there be anything in dreams 
also, my mother, who was mighty observant that way, 
took minutes, which I have since seen in the first leaf 
of her prayer-book, of several strange dreams she had 
while she was with child of her second son, which was 
myself. Once she noted that she dreamed she was 
carried away by a regiment of horse, and delivered 
in the fields of a son, that as soon as it was bom had 
two wings come out of its back, and in half-an-hour^s 
time flew away from her : and the very evening be- 
fore I was bom, she dreamed she was brought to bed 
of a son, and that all the while she was in labour a 
man stood under her window beating on a kettle-drum, 
which very much discomposed her. 

My father was a gentleman of a very plentiful for- 
time, having an estate of above ^5000 per annum, 
of a family nearly allied to several of the principal 
nobility, and lived about six miles from the town ; 
and my mother being at on some particular 

» [1] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

occasion, was surprised there at a friend*8 house, and 
brought me very safe into the world. 

I was my father^s second son, and therefore was not 
altogether so much slighted as younger sons of good 
families generally are. But my father saw some- 
thing in my genius also which particularly pleased 
him, and so made him take extraordinary care of 
my education. 

I was taught, therefore, by the best masters that 
could be had, everything that was needful to accom- 
plish a young gentleman for the world ; and at seven- 
teen years old my tutor told my father an academic 
education was very proper for a person of quality, and 
he thought me very fit for it : so my father entered 

me of College in Oxford, where I continued 

three years. 

A collegiate life did not suit me at all, though I 
loved books well enough. It was never designed that 
I should be either a lawyer, physician, or divine ; and 
I wrote to my father that I thought I had stayed 
there long enough for a gentleman, and with his leave 
I desired to give him a visit. 

During my stay at Oxford, though I passed through 
the proper exercises of the house, yet my chief read- 
ing was upon history and geography, as that which 
pleased my mind best, and supplied me with ideas 
most suitable to my genius; by one I understood 
what great actions had been done in the world, and 
by the other I understood where they had been done. 

My father readily complied with my desire of 
coming home ; for besides that he thought, as I did, 
that three years^ time at the university was enough, 
[2] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

he also most passionately loved me, and began to 
think of my settling near him. 

At my arrival I found myself extraordinarily 
caressed by my father, and he seemed to take a 
particular delight in my conversation. My mother, 
who lived in perfect union with him both in desires 
and affection, received me very passionately. Apart- 
ments were provided for me by myself, and horses 
and servants allowed me in particular. 

My father never went a-hunting, an exercise he 
was exceedingly fond of, but he would have me with 
him ; and it pleased him when he found me like the 
sport. I lived thus, in all the pleasures ^twas 
possible for me to enjoy, for about a year more, when 
going out one morning with my father to hunt a 
stag, and having had a very hard chase, and gotten 
a great way off from home, we had leisure enough to 
ride gently back; and as we returned my father 
took occasion to enter into a serious discourse with 
me concerning the manner of my settling in the 
world. 

He told me, with a great deal of passion, that he 
loved me above all the rest of his children, and that 
therefore he intended to do very well for me ; and 
that my eldest brother being already married and 
settled, he had designed the same for me, and pro- 
posed a very advantageous match for me, with a 
young lady of very extraordinary fortune and merit, 
and offered to make a settlement of ^000 per annum 
on me, which he said he would purchase for me 
without diminishing his paternal estate. 

There was too much tenderness in this discourse 
[8] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

not to affect me exceedingly. I told him I would 
perfectly resign myself unto his disposal. But as my 
father had, together with his love for me, a very nice 
judgment in his discourse, he fixed his eyes very 
attentively on me, and though my answer was with- 
out the least reserve, yet he thought he saw some 
uneasiness in me at the proposal, and from thence 
concluded that my compliance was rather an act of 
discretion than inclination; and that, however I 
seemed so absolutely given up to what he had pro- 
posed, yet my answer was really an effect of my 
obedience rather than my choice. 

So he returned very quick upon me : ** Look you, 
son, though I give you my own thoughts in the 
matter, yet I would have you be very plain with me ; 
for if your own choice does not agree with mine, I 
will be your adviser, but will never impose upon you, 
and therefore let me know your mind freely.^ " I 
don^t reckon myself capable, sir,^ said I, with a 
great deal of respect, ^^ to make so good a choice for 
myself as you can for me ; and though my opinion 
differed from yours, its being your opinion would 
reform mine, and my judgment would as readily 
comply as my duty.'' "I gather at least from 
thence," said my father, "that your designs lay 
another way before, however they may comply with 
mine ; and therefore I would know what it was you 
would have asked of me if I had not offered this to 
you ; and you must not deny me your obedience in 
this, if you expect I should believe yoiu* readiness 
in the other.'' 

^^Sir," said I, ^^ 'twas impossible I should lay out 
[4] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

for myself just what you have proposed ; but if my 
inclinations were never so contrary, though at your 
command you shall know them, yet I declare them 
to be wholly subjected to your order. I confess my 
thoughts did not tend towards mamage or a settle- 
ment ; for, though I had no reason to question your 
care of me, yet I thought a gentleman ought always 
to see something of the world before he confined 
himself to any part of it. And if I had been to ask 
your consent to anything, it should have been to give 
me leave to travel for a short time, in order to qualify 
myself to appear at home like a son to so good a 
father.^ 

" In what capacity would you travel ? " replied my 
father. ** You must go abroad either as a private 
gentleman, as a scholar, or as a soldier.^ ^^ If it 
were in the latter capacity, sir,'' said I, returning 
pretty quick, "I hope I should not misbehave 
myself; but I am not so determined as not to be 
rided by your judgment.*" "Ti-uly,'' replied my 
father, "I see no war abroad at this time worth 
while for a man to appear in, whether we talk of 
the cause or the encouragement ; and indeed, son, I 
am afraid you need not go far for adventures of that 
nature, for times seem to look as if this part of Europe 
would find us work enough.*" My father spake then 
relating to the quarrel likely to happen between the 
King of England and the Spaniard,^ for I believe he 
had no notions of a civil war in his head. 

1 Upon the breach of the match between the King of Eng- 
land and the Infanta of Spain ; and particularly upon the old 
quarrel of the King of Bohemia and the Palatinate. 
' [6] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOmS OF A CAVALIER 

In short, my father, perceiving my inclinations 
very forward to go abroad, gave me leave to travel, 
upon condition I would promise to return in two 
years at farthest, or sooner, if he sent for me. 

While I was at Oxford I happened into the society 
of a young gentleman, of a good family, but of a low 
fortune, being a younger brother, and who had indeed 
instilled into me the first desires of going abroad, 
and who, I knew, passionately longed to travel, but 
had not sufficient allowance to defray his expenses as 
a gentleman. We had contracted a very close firiend- 
ship, and our humours being very agreeable to one 
another, we daily enjoyed the conversation of letters. 
He was of a generous free temper, without the least 
affectation or deceit, a handsome proper person, a 
strong body, very good mien, and bmve to the last 
degree. His name was Fielding, and we called him 
Captain, though it be a very unusual title in a col- 
lege ; but fate had some hand in the title, for he had 
certainly the lines of a soldier drawn in his counte- 
nance. I imparted to him the resolutions I had taken, 
and how I had my father^s consent to go abroad, and 
would know his mind whether he would go with me. 
He sent me word he would go with all his heart. 

My father, when he saw him, for I sent for him 
immediately to come to me, mightily approved my 
choice ; so we got our equipage ready, and came away 
for London. 

T was on the 22nd of April 1630, when we em- 
barked at Dover, landed in a few hours at Calais, 
and immediately took post for Paris. I shall not 
trouble the reader with a journal of my travels, nor 

[6] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

with the description of places, which every geographer 
can do better than I ; but these Memoirs being onljr 
a relation of what happened either to ourselves, or in 
our own knowledge, I shall confine myself to that 
part of it. 

We had indeed some diverting passages in our 
journey to Paris, as first, the horse my comrade was 
upon fell so very lame with a slip that he could not 
go, and hardly stand, and the fellow that rid with us 
express, pretended to ride away to a town five miles 
off to get a fresh horse, and so left us on the road 
with one horse between two of us. We followed as 
well as we could, but being strangers, missed the way, 
and wandered a great way out the road. Whether 
the man performed in reasonable time or not we 
could not be sure, but if it had not been for an old 
priest, we had never found him. We met this man, 
by a very good accident, near a little village whereof 
he was curate. We spoke Latin enough just to make 
him understand us, and he did not speak it much 
better himself; but he canied us into the village 
to his house, gave us wine and bread, and enter- 
tained us with wondeiful courtesy. After this he 
sent into the village, hired a peasant, and a horse 
for my captain, and sent him to guide us into the 
road. At parting he made a great many compli- 
ments to us in French, which we could just under- 
stand ; but the sum was, to excuse him for a question 
he had a mind to ask us. After leave to ask what 
he pleased, it was if we wanted any money for our 
journey, and pulled out two pistoles, which he offered 
either to give or lend us. 

[7] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

I mention this exceeding courtesy of the curate 
because, though civility is very much in use in France, 
and especially to strangers, yet ^t is a very unusual 
thing to have them part with their money. 

We let the priest know, first, that we did not 
want money, and next that we were very sensible of 
the obligation he had put upon us ; and I told him 
in particular, if I lived to see him again, I would 
acknowledge it. 

This accident of our horse was, as we afterwards 
found, of some use to us. We had left our two 
servants behind us at Calais to bring our baggage 
after us, by reason of some dispute between the 
captain of the packet and the custom-house officer, 
which could not be adjusted, and we were willing to 
be at Paris. The fellows followed as fast as they 
could, and, as near as we could loam, in the time we 
lost our way, wei'e robbed, and our poiimanteaus 
opened. They took what they pleased ; but as there 
was no money there, but linen and necessaries, the 
loss was not great. 

Our guide carried us to Amiens, where we found 
the express and our two servants, who the express 
meeting on the road with a spare horse, had brought 
back with him thither. 

We took this for a good omen of our successful 
jouniey, having escaped a danger which might have 
been greater to us than it was to our servants ; for 
the highwa]rmen in France do not always give a 
traveller the civility of bidding him stand and deliver 
his money, but frequently fire upon him first, and 
then take his money. 

[8] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

We stayed one day at Amiens, to adjust this little 
disorder, and walked about the town, and into the 
great church, but saw nothing very remarkable there ; 
but going across a broad street near the great church, 
we saw a crowd of people gazing at a mountebank 
doctor, who made a long harangue to jthem with a 
thousand antic postures, and gave out bills this way, 
and boxes of physic that way, and had a great trade, 
when on a sudden the people raised a cry, ^* Larron^ 
Imronr [in English, "Thief, thief], on the other 
side the street, and all the auditors ran away from 
Mr. Doctor to see what the matter was. Among 
the I'est we went to see, and the case was plain and 
short enough. Two English gentlemen and a Scotch- 
man, travellers as we were, were standing gazing at 
this prating doctor, and one of them catched a fellow 
picking his pocket. The fellow had got some of 
his money, for he dropped two or three pieces just 
by him, and had got hold of his watch, but being 
surprised let it slip again. But the reason of telling 
this story is for the memagement of it. This thief 
had his seconds so ready, that as soon as the English- 
man had seized him they fell in, pretended to be 
mighty zealous for the stranger, takes the fellow by 
the throat, and makes a great bustle; the gentle- 
man not doubting but the man was secured let go 
his own hold of him, and left him to them, llie 
hubbub was great, and ^twas these fellows cried, 
^^ Larrony larron!^ but with a dexterity peculiar to 
themselves had let the right fellow go, and pretended 
to be all upon one of their own gang. At last they 
bring the man to the gentleman to ask him what 
[9] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the fellow had done, who, when he saw the person 
they seized on, presently told them that was not the 
man. Then they seemed to be in more consternation 
than before, and spread themselves all over the 
street, crying, ^^ Larrony larroni^ pretending to 
search for the fellow ; and so one one way, one an- 
other, they were all gone, the noise went over, the 
gentlemen stood looking one at another, and the 
bawling doctor began to have the crowd about him 
again. This was the first French trick I had the 
opportmiity of seeing, but I was told they have a 
great many more as dexterous as this. 

We soon got acquaintance with these gentlemen, 
who were going to Paris as well as we ; so the next 
day we made up our company with them, and were 
a pretty troop of five gentlemen and four servants. 

As we had really no design to stay long at Paris, 
so indeed, excepting the city itself, there was not 
much to be seen there. Cardinal Richelieu, who 
was not only a supreme minister in the Church, but 
Prime Minister in the State, was now made also 
General of the Eing^s Forces, with a title never 
known in France befoi'e nor since, viz.. Lieutenant- 
General ^^ au place du Roi,^ in the king^s stead, or, 
as some have since translated it, representing the 
person of the king. 

Under this character he pretended to execute all 
the royal powers in the army without appeal to the 
king, or without waiting for orders; and having 
parted from Paris the winter before had now act- 
ually begun the war against the Duke of Savoy, in 
the process of which he restored the Duke of Mantua, 
[10] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

and having taken Fignerol from the duke, put it 
into such a state of defence as the duke could never 
force it out of his hands, and reduced the duke, 
rather by manage and conduct than by force, to 
make peace without it; so as annexing it to the 
crown of France it has ever since been a thorn in his 
foot that has always made the peace of Savoy lame 
and precarious, and France has since made Fignerol 
one of the strongest fortresses in the world. 

As the cardinal, with all the military part of the 
court, was in the field, so the king, to be near him, 
was gone with the queen and all the court, just be- 
fore I reaiched Paris, to reside at Lyons. All these 
considered, there was nothing to do at Paris ; the 
court looked like a citizen'^s house when the family 
was all gone into the country, and I thought the 
whole city looked very melancholy, compared to all 
the fine things I had heai*d of it. 

The queen-mother and her party were chagrined 
at the cardinal, who, though he owed his grandeur 
to her immediate favour, was now grown too great 
any longer to be at the command of her Majesty, or 
indeed in her interest ; and therefore the queen was 
under dissatisfaction, and her party looked very much 
down. 

The Protestants were everywhere disconsolate, for 
the losses they had received at Rochelle, Nimes, and 
Montpellier had reduced them to an absolute de- 
pendence on the king^s will, without all possible 
hopes of ever recovering themselves, or being so much 
as in a condition to take arms for their religion, and 
therefore, the wisest of them plainly foresaw their own 

[11] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

entire reduction, as it since came to pass. And I 
remember very well that a Protestant gentleman 
told me once, as we were passing from Orleans to 
Lyons, that the English had ruined them; and 
therefore, says he, ^ I think the next occasion the 
king takes to use us ill, as I know ^t will not be long 
before he does, we must all fly over to England, 
where you are bound to maintain us for having 
helped to turn us out of our own country.^ I asked 
him what he meant by saying the English had done 
it ? He returned short upon me: "I do not mean," 
says he, "by not relieving Rochelle, but by helping 
to ruin Rochelle, when you and the Dutch lent ships 
to beat our fleet, which all the ships in Fitince could 
not have done without you.*" 

I was too young in the world to be very sensible of 
this before, and therefore was something startled at 
the charge ; but when I came to discourse with this 
gentleman, I soon saw the truth of what he said was 
undeniable, and have since reflected on it with regret, 
that the naval power of the Protestants, which was 
then superior to the royal, would certainly have been 
the recovery of all their fortunes, had it not been 
unhappily broke by their brethren of England and 
Holland, the former lending seven men-of-war, and 
the latter twenty, for the destruction of the Rochel- 
lers^ fleet ; and by these very ships the Rochellers^ 
fleet were actually beaten and destroyed, and they 
never afterward recovered their force at sea, and by 
consequence sunk under the siege, which the English 
afterwards in vain attempted to prevent. 

These things made the Protestants look vety dull, 
[12] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

and expected the ruin of all their party, which had 
certainly happened had the cardinal lived a few years 
longer. 

We stayed in Paris about three weeks, as well to 
see the court and what rarities the place afforded, as 
by an occasion which had like to have put a short 
period to our ramble. 

Walking one morning before the gate of the 
Louvre, with a design to see the Swiss drawn up, 
which they always did, and exercised just before they 
relieved the guards, a page came up to me, and speak- 
ing English to me, " Sir,^ says he, ** the captain must 
needs have your immediate assistance.'*^ I, that had 
not the knowledge of any person in Paris but my own 
companion, whom I called captain, had no room to 
question, but it was he that sent for me ; and crying 
out hastily to him, " Where ? " followed the fellow as 
fast as 't was possible. He led me through several 
passages which I knew not, and at last through a 
tennis-court and into a large room, where three men, 
like gentlemen, were engaged very briskly two against 
one. The room was very dark, so that I could not 
easily know them asunder, but being fully possessed 
with an opinion before of my captain^s danger, I ran 
into the room with my sword in my hand. I had not 
particularly engaged any of them, nor so much as 
made a pass at any, when I received a very dangerous 
thrust in my thigh, rather occasioned by my too hasty 
running in, than a real design of the person ; but en- 
raged at the hurt, without examining who it was hurt 
me, I threw myself upon him, and run my sword quite 
through his body. 

[13] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

The novelty of the adventure, and the unexpected 
fall of the man by a stranger come in nobody knew 
how, had becalmed the other two, that they really 
stood gazing at me. By this time I had discovered 
that my captain was not there, and that ^t was some 
strange accident brought me thither. I could speak 
but little French, and supposed they could speak no 
English, so I stepped to the door to see for the page 
that brought me thither, but seeing nobody there and 
the passage clear, I made off as fast as I could, without 
speaking a word ; nor did the other two gentlemen 
offer to stop me. 

But I was in a strange confusion when, coming into 
those entries and passages. which the page led me 
through, I could by no means find my way out. At 
last seeing a door open that looked through a house 
into the street, I went in, and out at the other door ; 
but then I was at as great a loss to know where I was, 
and which was the way to my lodgings. The wound 
in my thigh bled apace, and I could feel the blood 
in my breeches. In this interval came by a chair ; I 
called, and went into it, and bid them, as well as 
I could, go to the Louvre ; for though I knew not 
the name of the street where I lodged, I knew I 
could find the way to it when I was at the Bastile. 
The chairmen went on their own way, and being 
stopped by a company of the guards as they went, 
set me down till the soldiers were marched by; 
when looking out I found I was just at my own 
lodging, and the captain was standing at the door 
looking for me. I beckoned him to me, and, whis- 
pering, told him I was very much hurt, but bid him 

[14 J 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

pay the chairmen, and ask no questions, but come 
to me. 

I made the best of my way upstairs, but had lost so 
much blood, that I had hardly spirits enough to keep 
me from swooning till he came in. He was equally 
concerned with me to see me in such a bloody con- 
dition, and presently called up our landlord, and he 
as quickly called in his neighbours, that I had a 
room full of people about me in a quarter of an hour. 
But this had like to have been of worse consequence 
to me than the other, for by this time there was 
great inquiring after the person who killed a man at 
the tennis-court. My landlord was then sensible of 
his mistake, and came to me and told me the danger 
I was in, and very honestly offered to convey me to a 
friend's of his, where I should be very secure; I 
thanked him, and suffered myself to be carried at 
midnight whither he pleased. He visited me very 
often, till I was well enough to walk about, which was 
not in less than ten days, and then we thought fit to 
be gone, so we took post for Orleans. But when I 
came upon the road I found myself in a new error, 
for my wound opened again with riding, and I was 
in a worse condition than before, being forced to 

take up at a little village on the road, called , 

about miles from Orleans, where there was no 

surgeon to be had, but a sorry country barber, who 
nevertheless dressed me as well as he could, and in 
about a week more I was able to walk to Orleans at 
three times. Here I stayed till I was quite well, 
and then took coach for Lyons, and so through 
Savoy into Italy. 

[16] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

I spent near two years^ time after this bad begin- 
ning in travelling through Italy, and to the several 
courts of Rome, Naples, Venice, and Vienna. 

Wlien I came to Lyons the king was gone from 
thence to Grenoble to meet the cardinal, but the 
queens were both at Lyons. 

The French affairs seemed at this time to have but 
an indifferent aspect. There was no life in anything 
but where the cardinal was : he pushed on everything 
with extraordinary conduct, and generally with suc- 
cess ; he had taken Susaand Fignerol from the Duke 
of Savoy, and was preparing to push the duke even 
out of all his dominions. 

But in the meantime everprhere else things looked 
ill ; the troops were ill-paid, the magazines empty, 
the people mutinous, and a general disorder seized the 
minds of the court; and the cardinal, who was 
the soul of everything, desired this interview at 
Grenoble, in order to put things into some better 
method. 

This politic minister always ordered matters so, 
that if there was success in anything the glory was 
his, but if things miscarried it was all laid upon the 
king. This conduct was so much the more nice, as 
it is the direct contrary to the custom in like cases, 
where kings assume the glory of all the success in an 
action, and when a thing miscarries make themselves 
easy by sacrificing their ministers and favourites to 
the complaints and resentments of the people ; but 
this accurate refined statesman got over this point. 

While we were at Lyons, and as I remember, the 
third day after our coming thither, we had like to 
[16] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

have been involved in a state broil, without knowing 
where we were. It was of a Sunday in the evening, 
the people of Lyons, who had been sorely oppressed 
in taxes, and the war in Italy pinching their trade, 
b^an to be very tumultuous. We found the day 
before the mob got together in great crowds, and 
talked oddly ; the king was everywhere reviled, and 
spoken disrespectfully of, and the magistrates of the 
city either winked at, or durst not attempt to meddle, 
lest they should provoke the people. 

But on Sunday night, about midnight, we was 
waked by a prodigious noise in the street. I jumped 
out of bed, and running to the window, I saw the 
street as full of mob as it could hold, some armed 
with muskets and halberds, matched in very good 
order ; others in disorderly crowds, all shouting and 
crying out, *^ Du paix le roi,^ and the like. One that 
led a great party of this rabble carried a loaf of 
bread upon the top of a pike, and other lesser loaves, 
signifying the smallness of their bread, occasioned 
by dearness. 

By morning this crowd was gathered to a great 
height ; they ran roving over the whole city, shut up 
all the shops, and forced all the people to join with 
them from thence. They went up to the castle, and 
renewing the clamour, a strange consternation seized 
all the princes. 

They broke open the doors of the officers, collectors 
of the new taxes, and plundered their houses, and 
had not the persons themselves fled in time they had 
been very ill-treated. 

The queen-mother, as she was very much displeased 
« [17] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

to see such consequences of the government, in whose 
management she had no share, so I suppose she had 
the less concern upon her. However, she came into 
the court of the castle and showed herself to the 
people, gave money amongst them, and spoke gently 
to them ; and by a way peculiar to herself, and which 
obliged all she talked with, she pacified the mob 
gradually, sent them home with promises of redress 
and the like ; and so appeased this tumult in two 
days, by her prudence, which the guards in the castle 
had small mind to meddle with, and if they had, 
would in all probability have made the better side 
the worse. 

There had been several seditions of the like nature 
in sundiy other parts of France, and the very army 
began to murmur, though not to mutiny, for want 
of provisions. 

This sedition at Lyons was not quite over when 
we left the place, for, finding the city all in a broil, 
we considered we had no business there, and what 
the consequence of a popular tumult might be we 
did not see, so we prepared to be gone. We had not 
rid above three miles out of the city but we were 
brought as prisoners of war, by a party of mutineers, 
who liad been abroad upon the scout, and were 
charged with being messengers sent to the cai*dinal 
for forces to reduce the citizens. With these pre- 
tences they brought us back in triumph, and the 
queen-mother, being by this time grown something 
familiar to them, they carried us before her. 

When they inquired of us who we were, we called 
ourselves Scots ; for as the English were very much 
[18] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

out of favour in France at this time, the peace having 
been made not many months, and not supposed to be 
very durable, because particularly displeasing to the 
people of England, so the Scots were on the other 
extreme with the French. Nothing was so much 
caressed as the Scots, and a man had no more to do 
in France, if he would be well received there, than to 
say he was a Scotchman. 

When we came before the queen-mother, she 
seemed to receive us with some stiffness at first, and 
caused her guards to take us into custody ; but as 
she was a lady of most exquisite politics, she did 
this to amuse the mob, and we were immediately 
after dismissed ; and the queen herself made a hand- 
some excuse to us for the rudeness we had suffered, 
alleging the troubles of the times ; and the next 
morning we had three dragoons of the guards to con- 
voy us out of the jurisdiction of Lyons. 

I confess this little adventure gave me an aversion 
to popular tumults all my life after, and if nothing 
else had been in the cause, would have biassed me 
to 'espouse the king^s party in England when our 
popular heats carried all before it at home. 

But I must say, that when I called to mind since, 
the address, the management, the compliance in 
show, and in general the whole conduct of the queen- 
mother with the mutinous people of Lyons, and 
compared it with the conduct of my unhappy master 
the King of England, I could not but see that the 
queen understood much better than King Charles 
tiie management of politics and the clamours of the 
people. 

[19] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Had this princess been at the helm in England, 
she would have prevented all the calamities of the 
Civil War here, and yet not have parted with what 
that good prince yielded in order to peace neither. 
She would have yielded gradually, and then gained 
upon them gradually ; she would have managed 
them to the point she had designed them, as she did 
all parties in France ; and none could effectually 
subject her but the very man she had raised to be 
her principal support — I mean the cardinal. 

We went from hence to Grenoble, and arrived 
there the same day that the king and the cardinal 
with the whole court went out to view a body of 
6000 Swiss foot, which the cardinal had wheedled 
the cantons to grant to the king to help to ruin 
their neighbour the Duke of Savoy. 

The troops were exceeding fine, well-accoutred, 
brave, clean-limbed, stout-fellows indeed. Here I 
saw the cardinal ; there was an air of church gravity 
in his habit, but all the vigour of a general, and the 
sprightliness of a vast genius in his face. He affected 
• a little stiffiaess in his behaviour, but managed all 
his affairs with such clearness, such steadiness, and 
such application, that it was no wonder he had such 
success in every undertaking. 

Here I saw the king, whose figure was mean, his 
countenance hollow, and always seemed dejected, and 
every way discovering that weakness in his counte- 
nance that appeared in his actions. 

If he was ever sprightly and vigorous it was when 
the cardinal was with him, for he depended so much 
on everything he did, that he was at the utmost 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

dilemma when he was absent, alwap timorous, jeal- 
ous, and irresolute. 

After the review the cardinal was absent some 
days, having been to wait on the queen-mother at 
Lyons, where, as it was discoursed, they were at 
least seemingly reconciled. 

I observed while the cardinal was gone there was 
no court, the king was seldom to be seen, very small 
attendance given, and no bustle at the castle ; but 
as soon as the cardinal returned, the great councils 
were assembled, the coaches of the ambassadors went 
every day to the castle, and a face of business ap- 
peared upon the whole court 

Here the measures of the Duke of Savoy^s ruin 
were concerted, and in order to it the king and the 
cardinal put themselves at the head of the army, 
with which they immediately reduced all Savoy, took 
Chamberri and the whole duchy except Montmelian. 

The army that did this was not above 22,000 men, 
including the Swiss, and but indifferent troops 
neither, especially the French foot, who, compared 
to the infantry I have since seen in the Grerman and 
Swedish armies, were not fit to be called soldiers. 
On the other hand, considering the Savoyards and 
Italian troops, they were good troops ; but the car- 
dinal^s conduct made amends for all these deficiencies. 

From hence I went to Pignerol, which was then 
little more than a single fortification on the hill 
near the town called St. Bride^s, but the situation 
of that was very strong. I mention this because of 
the prodigious works since added to it, by which it 
has since obtained the name of *^ the right hand of 
[21] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

France."^ They had b^un a new line below the hill, 
and some works were marked out on the side of 
the town next the fort ; but the cardinal afterwards 
drew the plan of the works with his own hand, by 
which it was made one of the strongest fortresses in 
Europe. 

While I was at Fignerol, the governor of Milan, 
for the Spaniards, came with an army and sat down 
before Casale. The grand quarrel, and for which 
the war in this part of Italy was b^un, was this : 
The Spaniards and Germans pretended to the duchy 
of Mantua ; the Duke of Nevers, a Frenchman, had 
not only a title to it, but had got possession of it ; 
but being illnsupported by the French, was beaten 
out by the Imperialists, and after a long siege the 
Germans took Mantua itself, and drove the poor 
duke quite out of the country. 

The taking of Mantua elevated the spirits of the 
Duke of Savoy, and the Grermans and Spaniards be- 
ing now at more leisure, with a complete army came 
to his assistance, and formed the si^e of Montferrat. 

For as the Spaniards pushed the Duke of Mantua, 
so the French by way of diversion lay hard upon the 
Duke of Savoy. They had seized Montferrat, and 
held it for the Duke of Mantua, and had a strong 
French garrison under Thoiras, a brave and expe- 
rienced commander ; and thus affairs stood when we 
came into the French army. 

I had no business there as a soldier, but having 

passed as a Scotch gentleman with the mob at 

Lyons, and after with her Majesty the queen-mother, 

when we obtained the guard of her dragoons, we 

fJWJ 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

had also her Majesty^s pass, with which we came 
and went where we pleased. And the cardinal, who 
was then not on very good terms with the queen, 
but willing to keep smooth water there, when two or 
three times our passes came to be examined, showed 
a more than ordinary respect to us on that very ac- 
count, our passes being from the queen. 

Casale being besieged, as I have observed, began 
to be in danger, for the cardinal, who ^t was thought 
had formed a design to ruin Savoy, was more intent 
upon 'that than upon the succour of tlie Duke of 
Mantua ; but necessity calling upon him to deliver 
so great a captain as Thoiras, and not to let such a 
place as Casale fall into the hands of the enemy, the 
king, or cardinal rather, ordered the Duke of Mont- 
morency, and the Marshal D'Effiat, with 10,000 
foot and SOOO horse, to march and join the Mar- 
echals De La Force and Schomberg, who lay already 
with an army on the frontiers of Genoa, but too 
weak to attempt the raising the siege of Casale. 

As all men thought there would be a battle be- 
tween the French and the Spaniards, I could not 
prevail with myself to lose the opportunity, and 
therefore by the help of the passes above mentioned, 
I came to the French army under the Duke of Mont- 
morency. We marched through the enemy's coun- 
try with great boldness and no small hazard, for the 
Duke of Savoy appeared frequently with great 
bodies of horse on the rear of the army, and fre- 
quently skirmished with our troops, in one of which 
I had the folly — I can call it no better, for I had 
no business there — to go out and see the sport, 
[28] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

as the French gentlemen called it. I was but a 
raw soldier, and did not like the sport at all, for 
this party was surrounded by the Duke of Savoy, 
and almost all killed, for as to quarter they neither 
asked nor gave. I ran away very fairly, one of the 
first, and my companion with me, and by the good- 
ness of our horses got out of the fray, and being not 
much known in the army, we came into the camp 
an hour or two after, as if we had been only riding 
abroad for the air. 

This little rout made the general very cautious, 
for the Savoyards were stronger in horse by three or 
four thousand, and the army always marched in a 
body, and kept their parties in or very near hand. 

I escaped another rub in this French army about 
five days after, which had like to have made me pay 
dear for my curiosity* 

The Duke de Montmorency and the Marshal 
Schomberg joined their anny about four or five 
days after, and immediately, according to the car- 
dinaPs instructions, put themselves on the march for 
the relief of Casale. 

The army had marched over a great plain, with 
some marshy grounds on the right and the Po on 
the left, and as the country was so well discovered 
that ^t was thought impossible any mischief should 
happen, the generals observed the less caution. At 
the end of this plain was a long wood and a lane or 
narrow defile through the middle of it. 

Through this pass the army was to march, and the 
van began to file through it about four oVlock. By 
three hours^ time aU the army was got through, or 
[24] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

into the pass, and the artillery was just entered 
when the Duke of Savoy, with 4000 horse and 1500 
dragoons, with every horseman a footman behind 
him, whether he had swam the Po or passed it above 
at a bridge, and made a long march after, was not 
examined, but he came boldly up the plain and 
charged our rear with a great deal of fury. 

Our artillery was in the lane, and as it was impos- 
sible to turn them about and make way for the army, 
so the rear was obliged to support themselves and 
maintain the fight for above an hour and a half. 

In this time we lost abundance of men, and if it 
had not been for two accidents all that line had been 
cut off. One was, that the wood was so near that 
those regiments which were disordered presently 
sheltered themselves in the wood ; the other was, 
that by this time the Marshal Schomberg, with the 
horse of the van, began to get back through the 
lane, and to make good the ground from whence 
the other had been beaten, till at last by this means 
it came to almost a pitched battle. 

There were two regiments of French dragoons 
who did excellent service in this action, and main- 
tained their ground till they were almost all killed. 

Had the Duke of Savoy contented himself with 
the defeat of five regiments on the right, which he 
quite broke and drove into the wood, and with the 
slaughter and havoc which he had made among the 
rest, he had come off with honour, and might have 
called it a victory ; but endeavouring to break the 
whole party and carry off some cannon, the obstinate 
resistance of these few dragoons lost him his advan* 
[«5] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

tages, and held him in play till so many fresh troops 
got through the pass again as made us too strong 
for him, and had not night parted them he had 
been entirely defeated. 

At last, finding our troops increase and spread 
themselves on his flank, he retired and gave over. We 
had no great stomach to pursue him neither, though 
some horse were ordered to follow a little way. 

The duke lost above a thousand men, and we 
almost twice as many, and but for those dragoons 
had lost the whole rear-guard and half our cannon. 
I was in a very sorry case in this action too. I was 
with the rear in the regiment of horse of Perigoort, 
with a captain of which regiment I had contracted 
some acquaintance. I would have rid off at first, as 
the captain desired me, but there was no doing it, 
for the cannon was in the lane, and the horse and 
dragoons of the van eagerly pressing back through 
the lane must have run me down or canied me with 
them. As for the wood, it was a good shelter to 
save one^s life, but was so thick there was no passing 
it on horseback. 

Our regiment was one of the first that was broke, 
and being all in confusion, with the Duke of Savoy^s 
men at our heels, away we ran into the wood. Never 
was there so much disorder among a parcel of run- 
aways as when we came to this wood; it was so 
exceeding bushy and thick at the bottom there was 
no entering it, and a volley of small shot from a 
regiment of Savoy^s dragoons poured in upon us at 
our breaking into the wood made terrible work 
among our horses. 

[26] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

For my part I was got into the wood, but was 
forced to quit my horse, and by that means, with a 
great deal of difficulty, got a little farther in, where 
there was a little open place, and being quite spent 
with labouring among the bushes I sat down resolving 
to take my fate there, let it be what it would, for I 
was not able to go any farther. I had twenty or 
thirty more in the same condition come to me in less 
than half-an-hour, and here we waited very securely 
the success of the battle, which was as before. 

It was no small relief to those with me to hear the 
Savoyards were beaten, for otherwise they had all 
been lost ; as for me, I confess, I was glad as it was 
because of the danger, but otherwise I cared not 
much which had the better, for I designed no service 
among them. 

One kindness it did me, that I began to consider 
what I had to do here, and as I could give but a very 
slender account of myself for what it was I run all 
these risks, so I resolved they should fight it among 
themselves, for I would come among them no more. 

The captain with whom, as I noted above, I had 
contracted some acquaintance in this regiment, was 
killed in this action, and the French had really a 
gi-eat blow here, though they took care to conceal 
it all they could; and I cannot, without smiling, 
read some of the histories and memoirs of this action, 
which they are not ashamed to call a victory. 

We marched on to Saluzzo, and the next day the 

Duke of Savoy presented himself in battalia on the 

other side of a small river, giving us a fair challenge 

to pass and engage him. We always said in our 

[27] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

camp that the orders were to fight the Duke of Savoy 
wherever we met him ; but though he braved us in 
our view we did not care to engage him, but we 
brought Saluzzo to surrender upon articles, which 
the duke could not relieve witjiout attacking our 
camp, which he did not care to do. 

The next morning we had news of the surrender of 
Mantua to the Imperial army. We heard of it first 
from the Duke of Savoy'^s cannon, which he fired by 
way of rejoicing, and which seemed to make him 
amends for the loss of Saluzzo. 

As this was a mortification to the French, so it 
quite damped the success of the campaign, for the 
Duke de Montmorency imagining that the Imperial 
general would send immediate assistance to the Mar- 
quis Spinola, who besieged Casale, they called fre- 
quent councils of war what course to take, cuid at 
last resolved to halt in Piedmont. A few days after 
their resolutions were changed again by the news of 
the death of the Duke of Savoy, Charles Emanuel, 
who died, as some say, agitated with the extremes 
of joy and grief. 

This put our generals upon considering again 
whether they should march to the relief of Casale, 
but the chimera of the Germans put them by, and 
so they took up quarters in Piedmont. They took 
several small places from the Duke of Savoy, making 
advantage of the consternation the duke^s subjects 
were in on the death of their prince, and spread 
themselves from the seaside to the banks of the Po. 
But here an enemy did that for them which the 
Savoyards could not, for the plague got into their 
[28] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

quarters and destroyed abundance of people, both of 
the army and of the country. 

I thought then it was time for me to be gone, for 
I had no manner of courage for that risk; and I 
think verily I was more afraid of being taken sick in 
a strange country than ever I was of being killed in 
battle. Upon this resolution I procured a pass to 
go for Grenoa, and accordingly began my journey, 
but was arrested at Villa Franca by a slow lingering 
fever, which held me about five days, and then 
turned to a burning malignancy, and at last to the 
plague. My friend, the captain, never left me night 
nor day ; and though for four days more I knew no- 
body, nor was capable of so much as thinking of 
myself, yet it pleased God that the distemper 
gathered in my neck, swelled and broke. During 
the swelling I was raging mad with the violence of 
pain, which being so near my head swelled that also 
in proportion, that my eyes were swelled up, and for 
twenty-four hours my tongue and mouth ; then, as 
my servant told me, all the physicians gave me over, 
as past all remedy, but by the good providence of 
God the swelling broke. 

The prodigious collection of matter which this 
swelling discharged gave me immediate relief, and I 
became sensible in less than an hour^s time ; and in 
two hours or thereabouts fell into a little slumber 
which recovered my spirits and sensibly revived me. 
Here I lay by it till the middle of September. My 
captain fell sick after me, but recovered quickly. 
His man had the plague, and died in two days ; my 
man held it out welL 

[29] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

About the middle of September we heard of a 
truce concluded between all parties, and being un- 
willing to winter at Villa Franca, I got passes, and 
though we were both but weak, we began to travel 
in litters for Milan. 

And here I experienced the truth of an old English 
proverb, that standers-by see more than the gamesters. 

The French, Savoyards, and Spaniards made this 
peace or truce all for sepaitite and several grounds, 
and every one were mistaken. 

The French jdelded to it because they had given 
over the relief of Casale, and were very much afraid 
it would fall into the hands of the Marquis Spinola. 
The Savoyards yielded to it because they were afraid 
the French would winter in Piedmont ; the Spaniards 
yielded to it because the Duke of Savoy being dead, 
and the Count de Colalto, the Imperial general, 
giving no assistance, and his army weakened by sick- 
ness and the fatigues of the siege, he foresaw he 
should never take the town, and wanted but to come 
off with honour. 

The French were mistaken, because really Spinola 
was so weak that had they marched on into Mont- 
ferrat the Spaniards must have raised the siege ; the 
Duke of Savoy was mistaken, because the plague had 
so weakened the French that they durst not have 
stayed to winter in Piedmont; and Spinola was 
mistaken, for though he was very slow, if he had 
stayed before the town one fortnight longer, Thoiras 
the governor must have surrendered, being brought 
to the last extremity. 

Of all these mistakes the French had the advantage 
[80] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

for Casale was relieved, the army had time to be re- 
cruitedy and the French had the best of it by an early 
campaign. 

I passed through Montferrat in my way to Milan 
just as the truce was declared, and saw the miserable 
remains of the Spanish army, who by sickness, fatigue, 
hard duty, the sallies of the garrison and such like con- 
sequences, were reduced to less than SOOO men, and of 
them above 1000 lay wounded and sick in the camp. 

Here were several regiments which I saw drawn out 
to their arms that could not make up above seventy 
or eighty men, officers and all, and those half starved 
with hunger, almost naked, and in a lamentable con- 
dition. From thence I went into the town, and there 
things were still in a worse condition, the houses beaten 
down, the walls and works ruined, the garrison, by 
continual duty, reduced from 4500 men to less than 
800, without clothes, money, or provisions, the brave 
governor weak with continual fatigue, and the whole 
face of things in a miserable case. 

The French generals had just sent them 30,000 
crowns for present supply, which heartened them a 
little, but had not the truce been made as it was, they 
must have surrendered upon what terms the Spaniards 
had pleased to make them. 

Never were two armies in such fear of one another 
with so little cause ; the Spaniards afraid of the French 
whom the plague had devoured, and the French afraid 
of the Spaniards whom the siege had almost ruined. 

The grief of this mistake, together with the sense 
of his master, the Spaniards, leaving him without 
supplies to complete the siege, of Casale, so affected 
[81] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the Marquis Spinola, that he died for grief, and in 
him fell the last of that rare breed of Low Country 
soldiers, who gave the world so great and just a charac* 
ter of the Spanish infantry, as the best soldiers of the 
world ; a character which we see them so very much 
degenerated from since, that they hardly deserve the 
name of soldiers. 

I tarried at Milan the rest of the winter, both for 
the recovery of my health, and also for supplies from 
England. 

Here it was I first heard the name of Gustavus 
Adolphus, the king of Sweden, who now began his 
war with the emperor ; and while the king of Finance 
was at Lyons, the league with Sweden was made, in 
which the French contributed 1,200,000 crowns in 
money, and 600,000 per annum to the attempt of 
Gustavus Adolphus. About this time he landed 
in Pomerania, took the towns of Stettin and Stral- 
sund, and from thence proceeded in that prodigious 
manner of which I shall have occasion to be very 
particular in the prosecution of these Memoirs. 

I had indeed no thoughts of seeing that king or his 
armies. I had been so roughly handled already, that 
I had given over the thoughts of appearing among 
the fighting people, and resolved in the spring to 
pursue my journey to Venice, and so for the rest of 
Italy. Yet I cannot deny that as every Gazette gave 
us some accounts of the conquests and victories of 
this glorious prince, it prepossessed my thoughts with 
secret wishes of seeing him, but these were so young 
and unsettled, that I drew no resolutions from them 
for a long while after. 

[82] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

About the middle of January I left Milan and 
came to Genoa, from thence by sea to Leghorn, then 
to Naples, Rome, and Venice, but saw nothing in 
Italy that gave me any diversion. 

As for what is modem, I saw nothing but lewdness, 
private murders, stabbing men at the comer of a 
street, or in the dark, hiring of bravos, and the like ; 
all the diversions here ended in whoring, gaming^ 
and sodomy. These were to me the modem ex- 
cellencies of Italy ? and I had no gust to antiquities. 

TTwas pleasant indeed when I was at Rome to 
say here stood the Capitol, there the Colossus of 
Nero, here was the Amphitheatre of Titus, there the 
Aqueduct of , here the Fomm, there the Cata- 
combs, here the Temple of Venus, there of Jupiter, 
here the Pantheon, and the like ; but I never designed 
to write a book. As much as was useful I kept in 
my head, and for the rest, I left it to others. 

I observed the people degenerated from the ancient 
glorious inhabitants, who were generous, brave, and 
the most valiant of all nations, to a vicious baseness 
of soul, barbarous, treacherous, jealous and revenge- 
ful, lewd and cowardly, intolerably proud and haughty, 
bigoted to blind, incoherent devotion, and the gross- 
est of idolatry. 

Indeed, I think the unsuitableness of the people 
made the place unpleasant to me, for there is so 
little in a country to recommend it when the people 
disgrace it, that no beauties of the creation can 
make up for the want of those excellencies which 
suitable society procure the defect ofl This made 
Italy a very unpleasant country to me ; the people 
3 [88] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

were the foil to the place, all manner of hateful 
vices reigning in their general way of living. 

I confess I was not very religious myself, and being 
come abroad into the world young enough, might 
easily have been drawn into evils that had recom- 
mended themselves with any tolerable agreeableness 
to nature and common manners ; but when wicked- 
ness presented itself full-grown in its grossest freedoms 
and liberties, it quite took away all the gust to vice 
that the devil had furnished me with, and in this I 
cannot but relate one scene which passed between 
nobody but the devil and myself. 

At a certain town in Italy, which shall be name- 
less, because I won't celebrate the proficiency of one 
place more than another, when I beUeve the whole 
country equally wicked, I was prevailed upon rather 
than tempted, i la courtezan. 

If I should describe the woman I must give a 
very mean character of my own virtue to say I was 
allured by any but a woman of an extraordinary 
figure ; her face, shape, mien, and dress, I may, 
without vanity, say, the finest that I ever saw. 
When I had admittance into her apartments, the 
riches and magnificence of them astonished me, the 
cupboard or cabinet of plate, the jewels, the tapestry, 
and everything in proportion, made me question 
whether I was not in the chamber of some lady of 
the best quality ; but when after some convei*sation 
I found that it was really nothing but a courtezan 
— in English, a common street whore, a punk of 
the trade — I was amazed, and my inclination to 
her person began to cool. Her conversation ex* 
[84] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

ceeded, if possible, the best of quality, and was, I must 
own, exceeding agreeable ; she sung to her lute, and 
danced as fine as ever I saw, and thus diverted me 
two hours before an3rthing else was discoursed of. 
But when the vicious part came on the stage, I 
blush to relate the confusion I was in, and when 
she made a certain motion, by which I understood 
she might be made use of, either as a lady, or as 
, I was quite thunderstruck, all the vicious part 
of my thoughts vanished, the place filled me with 
horror, and I was aU over disorder and distraction. 

I b^an, however, to recollect where I was, and that 
in this country these were people not to be affronted ; 
and though she easily saw the disorder I was in, she 
turned it off with admirable dexterity, began to talk 
again i la gallant^ received me as a visitant, offered 
me sweetmeats and some wine. 

Here I began to be in more confusion than before, 
for I concluded she would neither offer me to eat or 
to drink now without poison, and I was very shy of 
tasting her treat; but she scattered this fear im- 
mediately by readily and of her own accord not only 
tasting but eating freely of everything she gave me. 
Whether she perceived my wariness, or the reason 
of it, I know not ; I could not help banishing my 
suspicion, the obliging carriage and strange charm 
of her conversation had so much power of me that I 
both ate and drank with her at aU hazards. 

When I offered to go, and at parting presented 

her five pistoles, I could not prevail with her to take 

them, when she spoke some Italian proverb which I 

could not readily understand, but by my guess it 

[86] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

seemed to imply that she would not take the pay, 
having not obliged me otherwise. At last I laid 
the pieces on her toilet, and would not receive them 
again, upon which she obliged me to pass my word 
to visit her again, else she would by no means accept 
my present. 

I confess I had a strong inclination to visit her 
again, and besides thought myself obliged to it in 
honour to my parole. But after some strife in my 
thoughts about it, I resolved to break my word with 
her ; when going at vespers one evening to see their 
devotions I happened to meet this very lady very 
devoutly going to her prayers. 

At her coming out of the church I spoke to her, 
she paid me her respects with a ^^ Seignior Inglese,^ 
and some words she said in Spanish, smiling, which 
I did not understand. I cannot say here, so clearly 
as I would be glad I might, that I broke my word 
with her ; but if I saw her any more I saw nothing 
of what gave me so much offence before. 

The end of my relating this story is answered in 
describing the manner of their address, without 
bringing myself to confession. If I did anything I 
have some reason to be ashamed of, it may be a less 
crime to conceal it than expose it. 

The particulars related, however, may lead the 
reader of these sheets to a view of what gave me a 
particular disgust at this pleasant part of the world, 
as they pretend to caU it, and made me quit the 
place sooner than travellers use to do that come 
thither to satisfy their curiosity. 

The prodigious stupid bigotry of the people also 
[86] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

was irksome to me ; I thought there was something 
in it very sordid. The entire empire the priests 
have over both the souls and bodies of the people, 
gave me a specimen of that meanness of spirit, 
which is nowhere else to be seen but in Italy, espe- 
cially in the city of Rome. 

At Venice I perceived it quite different, the civil 
authority having a visible superiority over the eccle- 
siastic, and the Church being more subject there to 
the State than in any other part of Italy. 

For these reasons I took no pleasure in filling my 
memoirs of Italy with remarks of places or things. 
All the antiquities and valuable remains of the 
Roman nation are done better than I can pretend 
to by such people who made it more their business ; 
as for me, I went to see, and not to write, and as 
little thought then of these Memoirs as I ill fur- 
nished myself to write them. 

I left Italy in April, and taking the tour of Bavaria, 
though very much out of the way, I passed through 
Munich, Passau, Lintz, and at last to Vienna. 

I came to Vienna the 10th of April 16S1, intend- 
ing to have gone from thence down the Danube into 
Hungary, and by means of a pass, which I had 
obtained from the English ambassador at Constanti- 
nople, I designed to have seen all the great towns on 
the Danube, which were then in the hands of the 
Turks, and which I had read much of in the history 
of the war between the Turks and the Germans ; but 
I was diverted from my design by the following 
occasion. 

There had been a long bloody war in the empire 
[37] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

of Grermany for twelve years, between the emperor, 
the Duke of Bavaria, the King of Spain, and the 
Popish princes and electors on the one side, and the 
Protestant princes on the other; and both sides 
having been exhausted by the war, and even the 
Catholics themselves beginning to dislike the growing 
power of the house of Austria, ^twas thought all 
parties were willing to make peace. Nay, things 
were brought to that pass that some of the Popish 
princes and electors began to talk of making alliances 
with the King of Sweden. 

Here it is necessary to observe, that the two Dukes 
of Mecklenburg having been dispossessed of most of 
their dominions by the tyranny of the Emperor 
Ferdinand, and being in danger of losing the rest, 
earnestly solicited the King of Sweden to come to 
their assistance ; and that prince, as he was related 
to the house of Mecklenburg, and especially as he 
was willing to lay hold of any opportunity to break 
with the emperor, against whom he had laid up an 
implacable prejudice, was very ready and forward to 
come to their assistance. 

The reasons of his quarrel with the emperor were 
grounded upon the Imperialists concerning themselves 
in the war of Poland, where the emperor had sent 
8000 foot and 2000 horse to join the Polish army 
against the king, and had thereby given some check 
to his arms in that war. 

In pursuance, therefore, of his resolution to quarrel 

with the emperor, but more particularly at the 

instances of the princes above-named, his Swedish 

Majesty had landed the year before at Stralsund 

[88] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

with about 12,000 men^and having joined with some 
forces which he had left in Polish Prussia, all which 
did not make 30,000 men, he began a w^ar with the 
emperor, the greatest in event, filled with the most 
famous battles, sieges, and extraordinary actions, 
including its wondeiful success and happy conclusion, 
of any war ever maintained in the world. 

The King of Sweden had already taken Stettin, 
Stralsund, Rostock, Wismar, and all the strong places 
on the Baltic, and began to spread himself in Ger- 
many. He had made a league with the French, as I 
observed in ray story of Saxony ; he had now made 
a treaty with the Duke of Brandenburg, and, in 
short, began to be terrible to the empire. 

In this conjuncture the emperor called the Gleneral 
Diet of the empire to be held at Ratisbon, where, as 
was pretended, all sides were to treat of peace and to 
join forces to beat the Swedes out of the empire. 
Here the emperor, by a most exquisite management, 
brought the affairs of the Diet to a conclusion, ex- 
ceedingly to his own advantage, and to the farther 
oppression of the Protestants ; and, in particular, in 
that the war against the King of Sweden was to be 
carried on in such manner as that the whole burthen 
and charge would lie on the Protestants themselves, 
and they be made the instruments to oppose their best 
friends. Other matters also ended equally to their 
disadvantage, as the methods resolved on to recover 
the Church lands, and to prevent the education of the 
Protestant clergy ; and what remained was referred 
to another General Diet to be held at Frankfort-au- 
Main in August 1631. 

[89] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

I won^t pretend to say the other Protestant 
princes of Germany had never made any overtures 
to the King of Sweden to come to then: assistance, 
but ^tis plain they had entered^ into no league with 
him ; that appears from the difficulties which re- 
tarded the fixing of the treaties afterward, both with 
the Dukes of Brandenburg and Saxony, which un- 
happily occasioned the ruin of Magdeburg. 

But ^t is plain the Swede was resolved on a war 
with the emperor. His Swedish Majesty might, and 
indeed could not but foresee that if he once showed 
himself with a sufficient force on the frontiers of the 
empire, all the Protestant princes would be obliged 
by their interest or by his arms to fall in with him, 
and this the consequence made appear to be a just 
conclusion, for the Electors of Brandenburg and 
Saxony were both foi*ced to join with him.^ 

First, they were willing to join with him — at 
least they could not find in their hearts to join with 
the emperor, of whose power they had such just ap- 
prehensions. They wished the Swede success, and 
would have been very glad to have had the work 
done at another man^s charge, but, like true Ger- 
mans, they were more willing to be saved than to 
save themselves, and therefore hung back and stood 
upon terms. 

Secondly, they were at last forced to it. The first 
was forced to join by the King of Sweden himself, 
who being come so far was not to be dallied with, 
and had not the Duke of Brandenburg complied as he 
did, he had been ruined by the Swede. The Saxon 
was driven into the arms of the Swede by force, for 
[40] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Count Tilly, ravaging his country, made him comply 
with any terms to be saved from destruction. 

Thus matters stood at the end of the Diet at Rat- 
isbon. The King of Sweden began to see himself 
leagued against at the Diet both by Protestant and 
Papist ; and, as I have often heard his Majesty say 
since, he had resolved to try to force them off from 
the emperor, and to treat them as enemies equally 
with the rest if they did not. 

But the Protestants convinced him soon after, 
that though they were tricked into the outward ap- 
pearance of a league against him at Ratisbon, they 
had no such intentions ; and by their ambassadoi's to 
him let liim know that they only wanted his powerful 
assistance to defend their councils, when they would 
soon convince him that they had a due sense of the 
emperor^s designs, and would do their utmost for 
their liberty. And these I take to be the first 
invitations the King of Sweden had to undertake 
the Protestant cause as such, and which entitled 
him to say he fought for the liberty and religion of 
the Grerman nation. 

I have had some particular opportunities to hear 
these things from the mouths of some of the very 
princes themselves, and therefore am the forwarder 
to relate them ; and I place them here because, 
previous to the part I acted on this bloody scene, 
't is necessary to let the reader into some part of the 
story, and to show him in what manner and on what 
occasions this terrible war began. 

The Protestants, alarmed at the usage they had 
met with at the former Diet, had secretly proposed 
[41] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

among themselves to form a general union or confed* 
eracy, for preventing that ruin which they saw, un* 
less some speedy remedies were applied, would be 
inevitable. The Elector of Saxony, the head of the 
Protestants, a vigorous and politic prince, was the first 
that moved it ; and the Landgrave of Hesse, a zeal- 
ous and gallant prince, being consulted with, it 
rested a great while between those two, no method 
being found practicable to bring it to pass, the em- 
peror being so powerful in all parts, that they fore* 
saw the petty princes would not dare to negotiate 
an afiair of such a nature, being surrounded with the 
Imperial forces, who by their two generals, Wallen- 
stein and Tilly, kept them in continual subjection 
and terror. 

This dilemma had like to have stifled the thoughts 
of the xmion as a thing impracticable, when one 
Seigensius, a Lutheran minister, a person of great 
abilities, and one whom the Elector of Saxony made 
great use of in matters of policy as well as religion, 
contrived for them this excellent expedient. 

I had the honour to be acquainted with this gentle- 
man while I was at Leipsic. It pleased him exceed- 
ingly to have been the contriver of so fine a structure 
as the Conclusions of Leipsic, and he was glad to be 
entertained on that subject. I had the relation from 
his own mouth, when, but very modestly, he told me 
he thought ^t was an inspiration darted on a sudden 
into his thoughts, when the Duke of Saxony calling 
him into his closet one morning, with a face full of 
concern, shaking his head, and looking very earnestly, 
^What will become of us, doctor?^ said the duke; 
[42] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

**we shall all be undone at Frankfort-au-Main.*^ 
**Why so, please your highness?^ says the doctor. 
" Why, they will fight Mrith the King of Sweden with 
our armies and our money,^ says the duke, '*and de- 
vour our friends and ourselves by the help of our 
friends and ourselves.'* "But what is become of 
the confederacy, then,^ said the doctor, " which your 
highness had so happily framed in your thoughts, and 
which the Landgrave of Hesse was so pleased with ? '" 
** Become of it ? ^ says the duke, " 't is a good thought 
enough, but 't is impossible to bring it to pass among 
so many members of the Protestant princes as are to 
be consulted with, for we neither have time to treat, 
nor will half of them dare to negotiate the matter, 
the Imperialists being quartered in their very bowels.** 
** But may not some expedient be found out,** says the 
doctor, " to bring them all together to treat of it in 
a general meeting ? ** ** *T is well proposed,** says the 
duke, ** but in what town or city shall they assemble 
where the very deputies shall not be besieged by Tilly 
or Wallenstein in fourteen days* time, and sacrificed 
to the cruelty and fury of the Emperor Ferdinand ? ** 
" Will your highness be the easier in it,** replies the 
doctor, ** if a way may be found out to call such an 
assembly upon other causes, at which the emperor 
may have no umbrage, and perhaps give his assent? 
You know the Diet at Frankfort is at hand; *tis 
necessary the Protestants should have an assembly 
of their own to prepare matters for the General Diet, 
and it may be no difficult matter to obtain it.** The 
duke, surprised with joy at the motion, embraced the 
doctor with an extraordinary transport " Thou hast 
[43] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

done it, doctor,^ said he, and immediately caused him 
to draw a form of a letter to the emperor, which he 
did with the utmost dexterity of style, in which 
he was a great master, representing to his Imperial 
Majesty that, in order to put an end to the troubles 
of Grermany, his Majesty would be pleased to permit 
the Protestant princes of the empire to hold a Diet 
to themselves, to consider of such matters as they were 
to treat of at the General Diet, in order to conform 
themselves to the will and pleasure of his Imperial 
Majesty, to drive out foreigners, and settle a lasting 
peace in the empire. He also insinuated something 
of their resolutions unanimously to give their sufirages 
in favour of the King of Hungary at the election of 
a king of the Romans, a thing which he knew the 
emperor had in his thought, and would push at with 
all his might at the Diet. This letter was sent, and 
the bait so neatly concealed, that the Electors of 
Bavaria and Mentz, the King of Hungary, and several 
of the Popish princes, not foreseeing that the ruin of 
them all lay in the bottom of it, foolishly advised the 
emperor to consent to it. 

In consenting to this the emperor signed his own 
destruction, for here began the conjunction of the 
Grerman Protestants with the Swede, which was the 
fatallest blow to Ferdinand, and which he could 
never recover. 

Accordingly the Diet was held at Leipsic, February 
8, 1630, where the Protestants agreed on several 
heads for their mutual defence, which were the 
grounds of the following war. These were the 
famous Conclusions of Leipsic, which so alarmed 
[44] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the emperor and the whole empire, that to crush it 
in the beginning, the emperor commanded Count 
Tilly immediately to fall upon the Landgrave of 
Hesse and the Duke of Saxony as the principal 
heads of the union ; but it was too late. 
The Conclusions were digested into ten heads : — 
!• That since their sins had brought God's judg- 
ments upon the whole Protestant Church, they 
should command public prayers to be made to 
Almighty God for the diverting the calamities that 
attended them. 

2. That a treaty of peace might be set on foot, 
in order to come to a right understanding with the 
Catholic princes. 

3. That a time for such a treaty being obtained, 
they should appoint an assembly of delegates to meet 
preparatory to the treaty. 

4. That all their complaints should be humbly 
represented to his Imperial Majesty and the Catholic 
Electors, in order to a peaceable accommodation. 

6. That they claim the protection of the emperor, 
according to the laws of the empire, and the present 
emperor^s solemn oath and promise. 

6. That they would appoint deputies who should 
meet at certain times to consult of their common 
interests, and who should be always empowered to 
conclude of what should be thought needful for their 
safety. 

7. That they will raise a competent force to main* 
tain and defend their liberties, rights, and religion. 

8. That it is agreeable to the Constitution of the 
empire, concluded in the Diet at Augsburg, to do so. 

[45] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

9. That the arming for their necessary defence 
shall by no means hinder their obedience to his 
Imperial Majesty, but that they will still continue 
their loyalty to him. 

10, They agree to proportion their forces, which 
in all amounted to 70,000 men. 

The emperor, exceedingly startled at the Con- 
clusions, issued out a severe proclamation or ban 
against them, which imported much the same thing 
as a declaration of war, and commanded Tilly to 
begin, and immediately to fall on the Duke of 
Saxony with all the fury imaginable, as I have al- 
ready observed. 

Here began the flame to break out ; for upon the 
emperor*s ban, the Protestants send away to the 
King of Sweden for succour. 

His Swedish Majesty had already conquered Meck- 
lenburg, and part of Pomerania, and was advancing 
with his victorious troops, increased by the addition 
of some regiments raised in those parts, in order to 
carry on the war against the emperor, having designed 
to follow up the Oder into Silesia, and so to push 
the war home to the emperor^s hereditary countries 
of Austria and Bohemia, when the first messengers 
came to him in tliis case; but this changed his 
measures, and brought him to the frontiers of Brand- 
enburg resolved to answer the desires of the Prot- 
estants.- But here the Duke of Brandenburg began 
to halt, making some difficulties and demanding 
terms, which drove the king to use some extremities 
with him, and stopped the Swedes for a while, who 
had otherwise been on the banks of the Elbe as 
[46] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

soon as Till}', the Imperial general, had entered 
Saxony, which if they had done, the miserable destruc- 
tion of Magdeburg had been prevented, as I observed 
before. 

The king had been invited into the union, and 
when he first came back from the banks of the Oder 
he had accepted it, and was preparing to back it 
with all his power. 

The Duke of Saxony had already a good army, 
which he had with infinite diligence recruited, and 
mustered them under the cannon of Leipsic. The 
King of Sweden having, by his ambassador at Leipsic, 
entered into the union of the Protestants, was ad* 
vancing victoriously to their aid, just as Count Tilly 
had entered the Duke of Saxony''s dominions. The 
fame of the Swedish conquests, and of the hero who 
commanded them, shook my resolution of travelling 
into Turkey, being resolved to see theconjunction 
of the Protestant armies, and before the fire was 
broke out too far to take the advantage of seeing 
both sides. 

While I remained at Vienna, uncertain which way 
I should proceed, I remember I observed they talked 
of the King of Sweden as a prince of no consideration, 
one that they might let go on and tire himself in 
Mecklenburg and thereabout, till they could find 
leisure to deal with him, and then might be crushed 
as they pleased ; but ^tis never safe to despise an 
enemy, so this was not an enemy to be despised, as 
they afterwards found. 

As to the Conclusions of Leipsic, indeed, at first 
they gave the Imperial court some uneasiness, but 
[47] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

when they found the Imperial armies began to fright 
the members out of the union, and that the several 
branches had no considerable forces on foot, it was 
the general discourse at Vienna that the union at 
Leipsic only gave the emperor an opportunity to 
crush absolutely the Dukes of Saxony, Brandenburg, 
and the Landgrave of Hesse, and they looked upon 
it as a thing certain. 

I never saw any real concern in their faces at 
Vienna till news came to court that the King of 
Sweden had entered into the union ; but as this made 
them very uneasy, they began to move the power- 
fullest methods possible to divert this storm ; and 
upon this news Tilly was hastened to fall into Saxony 
before this union could proceed to a conjunction of 
forces. This was certainly a very good resolution, and 
no measure could have been more exactly concerted, 
had not the diligence of the Saxons prevented it. 

The gathering of this storm, which from a cloud 
began to spread over the empire, and from the little 
duchy of Mecklenburg began to threaten all Ger- 
many, absolutely determined me, as I noted before, 
as to travelling, and laying aside the thoughts of 
Hungary, I resolved, if possible, to see the King 
of Sweden's army, 

I parted from Vienna the middle of May, and took 
post for Great Glogau in Silesia, as if I had purposed 
to pass into Poland, but designing indeed to go down 
the Oder to Custrim in the marquisate of Branden- 
burg, and so to Berlin. But when I came to the 
frontiers of Silesia, though I had passes, I could go 
no farther, the guards on all the frontiers were so 
[48] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

strict, so I was obliged to come back into Bohemia, 
and went to Prague. From hence I found I could 
easily pass through the Imperial provinces to the 
lower Saxony, and accordingly took passes for Ham* 
burg, designing, however, to use them no farther 
than I found occasion. 

By virtue of these passes I got into the Imperial 
army, under Count Tilly, then at the siege of Mag- 
deburg, May the Snd. 

I confess I did not foresee the fate of this city, 
neither, I believe, did Count Tilly himself expect to 
glut his fury with so entire a desolation, much less 
did the people expect it. I did believe they must 
capitulate, and I perceived by discourse in the army 
that Tilly would give them but very indifferent condi- 
tions ; but it fell out otherwise. The treaty of sur- 
I'ender was, as it were, begun, nay, some say^concluded, 
when some of the out-guards of the Imperialists 
finding the citizens had abandoned the guards of the 
works, and looked to themselves with less diligence 
than usual, they broke in, carried an half-moon, 
sword in hand, with little resistance ; and though it 
was a surprise on both sides, the citizens neither 
fearing, nor the army expecting the occasion, the 
garrison, with as much lesolution as could be expected 
under such a fright, flew to the walls, twice beat the 
Imperialists off, but fresh men coming up, and the ad- 
ministrator of Magdeburg himself being wounded 
and taken, the enemy broke in, took the city by 
storm, and entered with such terrible fury, that, 
without respect to age or condition, they put all the 
garrison and inhabitants, man, woman, and child, to 
* [49] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the sword, plundered the city, and when they had 
done this set it on fire. 

This calamity sure was the dreadfuUest sight that 
ever I saw; the rage of the Imperial soldiers was 
most intolerable, and not to be expressed. Of 26,000, 
some said 30,000 people, there was not a soul to be 
seen alive, till the flames drove those that were hid 
in vaults and secret places to seek death in the sti*eets 
rather than perish in the fire. Of these miserable 
creatures some were killed too by the furious soldiers, 
but at last they saved the lives of such as came out 
of their cellars and holes, and so about two thou- 
sand poor desperate creatures were left. The exact 
number of those that perished in this city could 
never be known, because those the soldiers had first 
butchei^ed the flames afterwards devoured. 

I was on the other side of the Elbe when this 
dreadful piece of butchery was done. The city of 
Magdeburg had a sconce or fort over against 
it called the toll-house, which joined to the city 
by a very fine bridge of boats. This fort was taken 
by the Imperialists a few days before, and having 
a mind to see it, and the rather because A:om thence 
I could have a very good view of the city, I was go- 
ing over Tilly^s bridge of boats to view this fort. 
About ten o^dock in the morning I perceived they 
were storming by the firing, and immediately all ran 
to the works ; I little thought of the taking the city, 
but imagined it might be some outwork attacked, 
for we all expected the city would surrender that 
day, or next, and they might have capitulated upon 
very good terms. .. 

[60] 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



SACKING OF MAGDEBURG BY TILLY S ARMY 



They put all the garrison and inhabitants^ man^ 
xcoman^ and child^ to the sword 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Googk 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Being upon the works of the fort, on a sudden I 
heard the dreadfuUest cry raised in the city that can 
be imagined ; 't is not possible to express the manner 
of it, and I could see the women and children run- 
ning about the streets in a most lamentable condition. 

The city wall did not run along the side where the 
river was with so great a height, but we could 
plainly see the market-place and the several streets 
which run down to the river. In about an hour^s 
time after this first cry all was in confusion ; there was 
little shooting, the execution was all cutting of 
throats and mere house miu'ders. The resolute gar- 
rison, with the brave Beuron Falkenberg, fought it 
out to the last, and were cut in pieces, and by this 
time the Imperial soldiers having broke open the 
gates and entered on all sides, the slaughter was 
very dreadful. We could see the poor people in 
crowds driven down the streets, flying from the fury 
of the soldiers, who followed butchering them as 
fast as they could, and refused mercy to anybody, 
till driving them to the river's edge, the desperate 
wretches would throw themselves into the river, 
where thousands of them perished, especially women 
and children. Several men that could swim got 
over to our side, where the soldiers not heated with 
fight gave them quarter, and took them up, and I 
cannot but do this justice to the German offi- 
cers in the fort : they had five small flat boats, and 
they gave leave to the soldiers to go off in them, 
and get what booty they could, but charged them 
not to kill anybody, but take them all prisonei-s. 

Nor was their humanity ill rewarded, for the 
[61] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVATLIER 

soldiers, wisely avoiding those places where their 
fellows were employed in butchering the miserable 
people, rowed to other places, where crowds of 
people stood crying out for help, and expecting to 
be every minute either drowned or murdered ; of 
these at sundry times they fetched over near six 
hundred, but took care to take in none but such as 
offered them good pay. 

Never was money or jewels of greater service than 
now, for those that had anything of that sort to offer 
were soonest helped. 

Thei*e was a burgher of the town who, seeing a 
boat coming near him, but out of his call, by the 
help of a speaking trumpet, told the soldiers in it 
he would give them 20,000 dollars to fetch him off. 
They rowed close to the shore, and got him with his 
wife and six children into the boat, but such throngs 
of people got about the boat that had like to have 
sunk her, so that the soldiers were fain to drive a 
great many out again by main force, and while they 
were doing this some of the enemies coming down 
the street desperately drove them all into the water. 

The boat, however, brought the burgher and his 
wife and children safe, and though they had not all 
that wealth about them, yet in jewels and money he 
gave them so much as made all the fellows very rich. 

I cannot pretend to describe the cruelty of this 
day : the to\vn by five in the afternoon was all in a 
flame ; the wealth consumed was inestimable, and a 
loss to the very conqueror. I think there was little 
or nothing left but the great church and about a 
hundred houses. 

[62] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

This was a sad welcome into the army for me, and 
gave me a horror and aversion to the emperor^s peo- 
ple, as well as to his cause. I quitted the camp the 
third day after this execution, while the fire was 
hardly out in the city; and from thence getting 
safe-conduct to pass into the Palatinate, I turned 
out of the road at a small village on the Elbe, called 
Emerfield, and by ways and towns I can give but 
small account of, having a boor for our guide, who 
we could hardly understand, I arrived at Leipsic on 
the 17th of May. 

We found the elector intense upon the strengthen- 
ing of his army, but the people in the greatest terror 
imaginable, every day expecting Tilly with the Grer- 
man army, who by his cruelty at Magdeburg was 
become so dreadful to the Protestants that they ex- 
pected no mercy wherever he came. 

The emperor's power was made so formidable to 
all the Protestants, particularly since the Diet at 
Ratisbon left them in a worse case than it found 
them, that they had not only formed the Conclu- 
sions of Leipsic, which all men looked on as the 
effect of desperation rather than any probable means 
of their deliverance, but had privately implored the 
protection and assistance of foreign powers, and 
particularly the King of Sweden, from whom they 
had promises of a speedy and powerful assistance. 
And truly if the Swede had not with a very strong 
hand rescued them, all their Conclusions at Leipsic 
had served but to hasten their ruin. I remember 
very well when I was in the Imperial army they 
discoursed with such contempt of the forces of the 
[68] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Protestants, that not only the Imperialists but the 
Protestants themselves gave them up as lost. The 
emperor had not less than 200,000 men in several 
armies on foot, who most of them were on the back 
of the Protestants in every comer. If Tilly did but 
write a threatening letter to any city or prince of 
the union, they presently submitted, renounced the 
Conclusions of Leipsic, and received Imperial garri- 
sons, as the cities of Ulm and Memmingen, the 
duchy of Wirtemberg, and several others, and almost 
all Suaben. 

Only the Duke of Saxony and the Landgrave of 
Hesse upheld the drooping courage of the Protes- 
tants, and refused all terms of peace, slighted all the 
threatenings of the Imperial generals, and the Duke 
of Brandenburg was brought in afterward almost by 
force. 

The Duke of Saxony mustered his forces under the 
walls of Leipsic, and I having returned to Leipsic, 
two days before, saw them pass the review. The 
duke, gallantly mounted, rode through the ranks, 
attended by his field-marshal, Amheim, and seemed 
mighty well pleased with them, and indeed the troops 
made a very fine appearance ; but I that had seen 
Tilly's army and his old weather-beaten soldiers, 
whose discipline and exercises were so exact, and 
their courage so often tried, could not look on the 
Saxon army without some concern for them when I 
considei*ed who they had to deal with. Tilly's men 
were rugged surly fellows, their faces had an air of 
hardy courage, mangled with wounds and scars, their 
armour showed the bruises of musket bullets, and the 
[64] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

rust of the winter storms. I observed of them their 
clothes were always dirty, but their arms were clean 
and bright ; they were used to camp in the open fields, 
and sleep in the frosts and rain ; their horses were 
strong and hardy like themselves, and well taught 
their exercises ; the soldiers knew their business so 
exactly that general orders were enough ; every pri- 
vate man was fit to command, and their wheelings, 
marchings, counter-marchings and exercise were done 
with such order and readiness, that the distinct woixls 
of command were hardly of any use among them ; 
they were flushed with victory, and hardly knew what 
it was to fly. 

There had passed some messages between Tilly and 
the duke, and he gave always such ambiguous answers 
as he thought might serve to gain time ; but Tilly 
was not to be put ofi^ with words, and drawing his 
army towards Saxony, sends four propositions to 
him to sign, and demands an immediate reply. The 
propositions were positive. 

1. To cause his troops to enter into the emperor's 
service, and to march in person with them against the 
King of Sweden. 

2. To give the Imperial army quarters in his 
country, and supply them with necessary provisions. 

3. To relinquish the union of Leipsic, and disown 
the ten Conclusions. 

4. To make restitution of the goods and lands of 
the Church. 

The duke being pressed by Tilly's trumpeter for an 
imniediate answer sat all night, and part of the next 
day, in council with his privy counsellors, debating 
[66] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

what reply to give him, which at last was concluded, 
in short, that he would live and die in defence of the 
Protestant religion, and the Conclusions of Leipsic, 
and bade Tilly defiance. 

The die being thus cast, he immediately decamped 
with his whole army for Torgau, fearing that Tilly 
should get there before him, and so prevent his con- 
junction with the Swede. The duke had not yet 
concluded any positive treaty with the King of 
Swedeland, and the Duke of Brandenburg having 
made some, difficulty of joining, they both stood on 
some niceties till they had like to have ruined them- 
selves all at once. 

Brandenburg had given up the town of Spandau 
to the king by a former treaty to secure a retreat 
for his army, and the king was advanced as far as 
Frankfort-upon-the-Oder, when on a sudden some 
small difficulties arising, Brandenburg seems cold in 
the matter, and with a sort of indifference demands 
to have his town of Spandau i*estoi*ed to him again. 
Gusta^nls Adolphus, who began presently to imagine 
the duke had made his peace with the emperor, and 
so would either be his enemy or pretend a neutrality, 
generously delivered him his town of Spandau, but 
immediately turns about, and with his whole army 
besieges him in his capital city of Berlin. This 
brought the duke to know his error, and by the 
interpositions of the ladies, the Queen of Sweden 
being the duke^s sister, the matter was accommodated, 
and the duke joined his forces with the king. 

But the Duke of Saxony had like to have been 
undone by this delay,, for the Imperialists, under 
[66] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Count de Furstenberg, we^ entered his country, and 
had possessed themselves of Halle, and Tilly was on 
his march to join him, as he afterwards did, and 
ravaging the whole country laid si^e to Leipsic 
itself. The duke driven to this extremity rather flies 
to the Swede than treats with him, and on the Snd 
of September the duke^s army joined with the 
King of Sweden. 

I had not come to Leipsic but to see the Duke of 
Saxony'^s army, and that being marched, as I have 
said, for Torgau, I had no business there, but if I 
had, the approach of Tilly and the Imperial army 
was enough to hasten me away, for I had no occasion 
to be besieged there ; so on the S7th of August I 
left the town, as several of the principal inhabitants 
had done befoi*e, and more would have done had not 
the governor published a proclamation against it, 
and besides they knew not whither to fly, for all 
places were alike exposed. The poor people were 
under dreadful apprehensions of a siege, and of the 
merciless usage of the Imperial soldiers, the example 
of Magdeburg being fresh before them, the duke and 
his army gone from them, and the town, though well 
furnished, but indifferently fortified. 

In this condition I left them, buying up stores of 
provisions, working hard to scour their moats, set up 
palisadoes, repair their fortifications, and preparing 
all things for a siege ; and following the Saxon army 
to Torgau, I continued in the camp till a few days 
before they joined the King of Sweden. 

I had much ado to persuade my companion from 
entering into the service of the Duke of Saxony, one 
[67] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

of whose colonels, with whom we had contracted a 
particular acquaintance, offering him a commission 
to be comet in one of the old regiments of horse ; 
but the difference I had observed between this new 
army and Tilly's old troops had made such an im- 
pression on me, that I confess I had yet no manner 
of inclination for the service, and therefore persuaded 
him to wait a while till we had seen a littie further 
into affairs, and particularly till we had seen the 
Swedish army which we had heard so much of. 

The difficulties which the Elector-Duke of Saxony 
made of joining with the king were made up by a 
treaty concluded with the king on the 2nd of 
September at Coswig, a small town on the Elbe, 
whither the king's ai'my was amved the night before ; 
for General Tilly being now entei*ed into the duke's 
country, had plundered and ruined all the lower pai-t 
of it, and was now actually besieging the capital city 
of Leipsic. These necessities made almost any con- 
ditions easy to him ; the greatest difficulty was that 
the King of Sweden demanded the absolute com- 
mand of the army, which the duke submitted to with 
less goodwill than he had reason to do, the king's 
experience and conduct considered. 

I had not patience to attend the conclusions of 
their particular treaties, but as soon as ever the pas- 
sage was clear I quitted the Saxon camp and went to 
see the Swedish army. I fell in with the out-guards 
of the Swedes at a little town called Beltsig, on the 
river Wersa, just as they were- relieving the guards 
and going to march, and having a pass fix&gt;m the 
English ambassador was very well received by the 
[68] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

officer who changed the guards, aiid with him I went 
back into the army. By nine in the morning the 
army was in full march, the king himself at the head 
of them on a grey pad, and riding from one brigade 
to another, ordered the march of every line himself. 

When I saw the Swedish troops, their exact dis- 
cipline, their order, the modesty and familiarity of 
their officers, and the regular living of the soldiers, 
their camp seemed a well-ordered city ; the meanest 
country woman with her market ware was as safe from 
violence as in the streets of Vienna. Thei*e were no 
regiments of whores and rags as followed the Impe- 
rialists ; nor any woman in the camp but such as 
being known to the provosts to be the wives of the 
soldiers, who were necessary for washing linen, taking 
care of the soldiers^ clothes, and dressing their 
victuals. 

The soldiers were well clad, not gay, furnished with 
excellent arms, and exceedingly careful of them ; and 
though they did not seem so terrible as I thought 
Tilly's men did when I first saw them, yet the figure 
they made, together with what we had heard of them, 
made them seem to me invincible : the discipline and 
order of their marchings, camping, and exercise was 
excellent and singular, and, which was to be seen in 
no armies but the king's, his own skill, judgment, 
and vigilance having added much to the general 
conduct of armies then in use. 

As I met the Swedes on their march I had no 

opportunity to acquaint myself with anybody till 

after the conjimction of the Saxon army, and then 

it being but four days to the great battle of Leipsic, 

[69] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

our acquaintance was but small, saving what fell out 
accidentally by conversation. 

I met with several gentlemen in the king^s army 
who spoke English very well ; besides that there were 
three regiments of Scots in the army, the colonels 
whereof I found were extraordinarily esteemed by 
the king, as the Lord Reay^ Colonel Lumsdell, and 
Sir John Hepburn. The latter of these, after I had 
by an accident become acquainted with, I found had 
been for many years acquainted with my father, and 
on that account I received a great deal of civility 
from him, which afterwards grew into a kind of 
intimate friendship. He was a complete soldier 
indeed, and for that reason so well beloved by that 
gallant king, that he hardly knew how to go about 
any great action without him. 

It was impossible for me now to restrain my young 
comrade firom entering into the Swedish service, and 
indeed everything was so inviting that I could not 
blame him. A captain in Sir John Hepbum^s regi- 
ment had picked acquaintance vrith him, and he 
having as much gallantry in his face as real courage 
in his heart, the captain had persuaded him to take 
service, and promised to use his interest to get him 
a company in the Scotch brigade. I had made him 
promise me not to part from me in my travels with- 
out my consent, which was the only obstacle to his 
desires of entering into the Swedish pay ; and being 
one evening in the captain^s tent with him and dis- 
coursing very freely together, the captain asked him 
very short but friendly, and looking earnestly at 
me, ^^ Is this the gentleman, Mr. Fielding, that has 
[60] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

done so much prejudice to the King of Sweden^s 
service P'' I was doubly surprised at the expression, 
and at the colonel, Sir John Hepburn, coming at 
that very moment into the tent* The colonel hear- 
ing something of the question, but knowing nothing 
pf the reason of it, any more than as I seemed a 
little to concern myself at it, yet after the ceremony 
due to his character was over, would needs know 
what I had done to hinder his Majesty^s service. 
"So much truly ,^ says the captain, "that if his 
Majesty knew it he would think himself very little 
beholden to him."" " I am sorry, sir,^ said I, " that 
I should offend in anything, who am but a stranger ; 
but if you would please to inform me, I would 
endeavour to alter anything in my behaviour that 
is prejudicial to any one, much less to his Majesty^s 
service.^ " I shall take you at your word, sir,^ says 
the captain ; " the King of Sweden, sir, has a par- 
ticular request to you.'' " I should be glad to know 
two things, sir,'' said I; "first, how that can be 
possible, since I am not yet known to any man in the 
army, much less to his Majesty ? and secondly, what 
the request can be?" "Why, sir, his Majesty 
desires you would not hinder this gentleman from 
entering into his service, who it seems desires nothing 
more, if he may have your consent to it." " I have 
too much honour for his Majesty," returned I, " to 
deny anything which he .pleases to command me ; 
but methinks'tis some hardship you should make 
that the king's order, which 't is very probable he 
knows nothing of," Sir John Hepburn took the case 
up something gravely, and drinking a glass of Leip- 
[61] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

sic beer to the captain, said, ** Come, captain, don^t 
press these gentlemen; the king desires no man^s 
service but what is purely volunteer.'' So we en- 
tered into other discourse, and the colonel perceiving 
by my talk that I had seen Tilly's army, was mighty 
curious in his questions, and seeming very well satis- 
fied with the account I gave him. 

The next day the army having passed the Elbe at 
Wittenberg, and joined the Saxon army near Torgau, 
his Majesty caused both armies to draw up in 
battalia, giving every brigade the same post in the 
lines as he purposed to fight in. I must do the 
memory of that glorious general this honour, that I 
never saw an army drawn up with so much variety, 
order, and exact regularity since, though I have 
seen many armies drawn up by some of the greatest 
captains of the age. The order by which his men 
were directed to flank and relieve one another, the 
methods of receiving one body of men if disordered 
into another, and rallying one squadron without dis- 
ordering another was so admirable ; the horse every- 
where flanked, lined and defended by the foot, and 
the foot by the horse, and both by the cannon, was 
such, that if those orders were but as punctually 
obeyed, 't were impossible to put an army so modelled 
into any confusion. 

The view being over, and the troops returned to 
their camps, the captain with whom we drank the 
day before meeting me told me I must come and 
sup with him in his tent, where he would ask my 
pardon for the afli'ont he gave me before. I told 
him he needed not put himself to the trouble, I was 
[68] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

not afironted at all; that I would do myself the 
honour to wait on him, provided he would give me 
his word not to speak any more of it as an affront* 

We had not been a quarter of an hour in his tent 
but Sir John Hepburn came in again, and address- 
ing to me, told me he was glad to find me there; 
that he came to the captain^s tent to inquire how 
to send to me ; and that I must do him the honour to 
go with him to wait on the king, who had a mind 
to hear the account I could give him of the Imperial 
army from my own mouth. I must confess I was at 
some loss in my mind how to make my addi*ess to 
his Majesty, but I had heard so much of the convers- 
able temper of the king, and his particular sweet- 
ness of humour with the meanest soldier, that I 
made no more difficulty, but having paid my respects 
to Colonel Hepburn, thanked him for the honour he 
had done me, and offei*ed to rise and wait upon 
him, "Nay,** says the colonel, "we will eat first, 
for I find Gourdon,** which was the captain'^s name, 
*^ has got something for supper, and the king'^s order 
is at seven o'clock."*^ So we went to supper, and Sir 
John, becoming very friendly, must know my name ; 
which, when I had told him, and of what place and 
family, he rose from his seat, and embracing me, 
told me he knew my father very well, and had been 
intimately acquainted with him, and told me several 
passages wherein my father had particularly obliged 
him. After this we went to supper, and the king's 
health being drank round, the colonel moved the 
sooner because he had a mind to talk with me. 

When we were going to the king he inquired of 
[68] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

me where I had been, and what occasion brought me 
to the army. I told him the short history of my 
travels, and that I came hither fix&gt;m Vienna on 
purpose to see the King of Sweden and his army. 
He asked me if there was any service he could do 
me, by which he meant, whether I desired an em- 
ployment. I pretended not to take him so, but told 
him the protection his acquaintance would afford me 
was more than I could have asked, since I might 
thereby have opportunity to satisfy my curiosity, 
which was the chief end of my coming abroad. He 
perceiving by this that I had no mind to be a 
soldier, told me very kindly I should command him 
in anything; that his tent and equipage, horses and 
servants should always have orders to be at my 
service ; but that as a piece of friendship, he would 
advise me to retire to some place distant from the 
army, for that the army would march to-morrow, 
and the king was resolved to fight Greneral Tilly, 
and he would not have me hazard myself; that 
if I thought fit to take his advice, he would have 
me take that interval to see the court at Berlin, 
whither he would send one of his servants to wait 
on me. 

His discourse was too kind not to extort the 
tenderest acknowledgment from me that I was capable 
of. I told him his care of me was so obliging, that 
I knew not what return to make him, but if he 
pleased to leave me to my choice I desired no greater 
favour than to trail a pike under his command in 
the ensuing battle. " I can never answer it to your 
father,** says he, " to suffer you to expose yourself so 
[64] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER ' 

far.'' I told him my father would certainly acknowl- 
edge his friendship in the proposal made me ; but I 
believed he knew him better than to think he would 
be well pleased with me if I should accept of it ; 
that I was sure my father would have rode post five 
hundred miles to have been at such a battle under 
such a general, and it should never be told him that 
his son had rode fifty miles to be out of it. He 
seemed to be something concerned at the i*esolution 
I had taken, and replied very quickly upon me, that 
he approved very well of my courage; "but,'' says 
he, " no man gets any credit by running upon need- 
less adventures, nor loses any by shunning hazards 
which he has no order for. T is enough," says he, 
** for a gentleman to behave well when he is com- 
manded upon any service; I have had fighting 
enough," says he, "upon these points of honour, 
and I never got anything but reproof for it from the 
king himself." 

" Well, sir," said I, " however, if a man expects 
to rise by his valour, he must show it somewhere ; 
and if I were to have any command in an ai*my, I 
would first try whether I could deserve it. I have 
never yet seen any service, and must have my induc- 
tion some time or other. I shall never have a better 
schoolmaster than yourself, nor a better school than 
such an army." " Well," says Sir John, " but you 
may have the same school and the same teaching 
after this battle is over ; for I must tell you before- 
hand, this will be a bloody touch. Tilly has a great 
army of old lads that are used to boxing, fellows 
with iron fiices, and 't is a little too much to engage 
^ [65] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

so hoily the first entrance into the wars. You may 
see our discipline this winter, and make your cam- 
paign with us next summer, when you need not 
fear but we shall have fighting enough, and you will 
be better acquainted with things. We do never 
put our common soldiers upon pitched battle the 
first campaign, but place our new men in garrisons 
and try iliem in parties first.^ ** Sir,^ said I, with a 
little more freedom, ^I believe I shall not make 
a trade of the war, and therefore need not serve an 
apprenticeship to it : ^t is a hard battle where none 
escapes. If I come off, I hope I shall not disgrace 
you, and if not, ^t will be some satisfaction to my 
father to hear his son died fighting under the 
command of Sir John Hepburn, in the army of 
the King of Sweden, and I desire no better epitaph 
upon my tomb.** 

^ Well,^ says Sir John, and by this time we wera 
just come to the king^s quarters, and the guards 
calling to us interrupted his reply ; so we went into 
the courtyard where the king was lodged, which was 
in an indifferent house of one of the burghers of 
Debien, and Sir John stepping up, met the king 
coming down some steps into a large room which 
looked over the town wall into a field where part of 
the artillery was drawn up. Sir John Hepburn sent 
his man presently to me to come up, which I did ; 
and Sir John without any ceremony carries me 
directly up to the king, who was leaning on his 
elbow in the window. The king turning about, 
^This is the English gentleman,^ says Sir John, 
*^ who I told your Majesty had been in the Imperial 
C66] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

army.'* ** How then did he get hither,** sAys the 
king, " without being taken by the scouts ? ** At 
which question. Sir John saying nothing, ^ By a pass, 
and please your Majesty from the English ambas- 
sador's secretary at Vienna,** said I, making a pro- 
found reverence. " Have you then been at Vienna ? ** 
says the king. "Yes, and please your Majesty,** 
said I ; upon which the king, folding up a letter he 
had in his hand, seemed much more earnest to talk 
about Vienna than about Tilly. ** And, pray, what 
news had you at Vienna ? ** ** Nothing, sir,** said I, 
" but daily accounts one in the neck of another of 
their own misfortunes, and your Majesty*s conquests, 
which makes a very melancholy court there." ** But, 
pray,** said the king, " what is the common opinion 
there about these affairs ? ** " The common people 
are terrified to the last degree,** said I, " and when 
your Majesty took Frankfort-upon-Oder, if your 
army had marched but twenty miles into Silesia, 
half the people would have run out of Vienna, and I 
left them fortifying the city.** "They need not,** 
replied the king, smiling; "I have no design to 
trouble them, it is the Protestant countries I must 
be for.** 

Upon this the Duke of Saxony entered the room, 
and finding the king engaged, offered to retire ; but 
the king, beckoning with his hand, called to him in 
French : ** Cousin,** says the king, " this gentleman 
has been travelling and comes from Vienna,** and so 
made me repeat what I had said before ; at which the 
king went on with me, and Sir John Hepburn 
informing his Majesty that I spoke High Dutch, he 
[67] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

changed his language, and asked me in Dutch where 
it was that I saw General Tilly^s army. I told his 
Majesty at the siege of Magdeburg. ^^At Magde- 
burg!,^ said the king, shaking his head; ^^ Tilly 
must answer to me one day for that city, and if not 
to me, to a greater King than I. Can you guess 
what army he liad with him P ^ said the king. *^ He 
had two armies with him,^ said I, *^ but one I sup- 
pose will do your Majesty no harm." " Two armies ! ** 
said the king. ^^ Yes, sir, he has one army of about 
S6,000 men,'' said I, " and another of above 16,000 
Whores and their attendants,'' at which the king 
laughed heartily. " Ay, ay," says the king, '* those 
15,000 do us as much harm as the 26,000, for they 
eat up the country, and devour the poor Protestants 
more than the men. Well," says the king, "do 
they talk of fighting us ? " " They talk big enough, 
sir," said I, *^ but your Majesty has not been so often 
fought with as beaten in their discourse." " I know 
not for the men," says the king, ** but the old man 
is as likely to do it as talk of it, and I hope to try 
them in a day or two." 

The king inquired after that several matters of me 
about the Low Countries, the Prince of Orange, and 
of the court and affairs in England ; and Sir John 
Hepburn informing his Majesty that I was the son 
of an English gentleman of his acquaintance, the 
king had the goodness to ask him what care he had 
taken of me against the day of battle. Upon which 
Sir John repeated to him the discourse we had to- 
gether by the way; the king seeming particularly 
pleased with it, began to take me to task himsel£ 
[68] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

** You English gentlemen,^ says he, *^ are too forward 
in the wars, which makes you leave them too soon 
again.^ " Your Majesty,*" replied I, " makes war in 
so pleasant a manner as makes all the world fond of 
fighting under your conduct.^ **Not so pleasant 
neither,^ says the king, ** here ^s a man can tell you 
that sometimes it is not very pleasant.** ** I knov 
not much of the warrior, sir," said I, " nor of the 
world, but if always to conquer be the pleasure of 
the war, your Majesty^s soldiers have all that can be. 
desired.** ** Well,** says the king, ** but however, con- 
sidering all things, I think you would do well to take 
the advice Sir John Hepburn has given you.** " Your 
Majesty may command me to anything, but where 
your Majesty and so many gallant gentlemen hazai^d 
their lives, mine is not worth mentioning; and .1 
should not dare to tell my father at my return into 
England that I was in your Majesty*s army, and made 
so mean a figure that your Majesty would not permit 
me to fight under that royal standard.** " Nay,** re- 
plied the king, " I lay no commands upon you, but 
you are young.** ** I can never die, sir,** said I, " with 
more honour than in your Majesty*s service.** I spake 
this with so much freedom, and his Majesty was so 
pleased with it, that he asked me how I would choose 
to serve, on horseback or on foot. I told his Majesty 
I should be glad to receive any of his Majesty*s com- 
mands, but if I had not that honour I had purposed 
to trail a pike under Sir John Hepburn, who had 
done me so much honour as to introduce me into his 
Majesty*s pi*esence. " Do so, then,** replied the king, 
and turning to Sir John Hepburn, said, **and, pray, 
[69] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

do you take care of him.^ At whieh, overcome with 
the goodness of his discourse, I could not answer a 
word, but made him a profound reverence and retired. 

The next day but one, being the 7th of Septem- 
ber, before day the army marched from Dieben to a 
large field about a mile from Leipsic, where we found 
Tilly^s army in full battalia in admirable order, which 
made a show both glorious and terrible. Tilly, like 
a fair gamester, had taken up but one side of the 
plain, and left the other fi*ee, and all the avenues 
open for the king'^s army ; nor did he stir to the 
charge till the king^s army was completely drawn 
up and advanced toward him. He had in his army 
44,000 old soldiers, every way answerable to what I 
have said of them before ; and I shall only add, a 
better army, I believe, never was so soundly beaten. 

The king was not much inferior in force, being 
joined with the Saxons, who were reckoned SS,000 
men, and who drew up on the left, making a main 
battle and two wings, as the king did on the right. 

The king placed himself at the right wing of his 
own horse, Gustavus Horn had the main battle of the 
Swedes, the Duke of Saxony had the main battle of 
his own troops, and General Amheim the right wing 
of his horse. The second line of the Swedes consisted 
of the two Scotch brigades, and three Swedish, with 
the Finland horse in the wings. 

In the beginning of the fight, Tilly's right wing 
charged with such irresistible fury upon the left of 
the king's army where the Saxons were posted, that 
nothing could withstand them. The Saxons fled 
amain, and some of them* carried the news over the 
[70] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

country that all was lost, and the king^s army over- 
thrown ; and indeed it passed for an oversight with 
some that the king did not place some of his old 
troops among the Saxons, who were new-raised men. 
The Saxons lost here near 2000 men, and hardly ever 
showed their faces again all the battle, except some 
few of their horse. 

I was posted with my comrade, the captain, at the 
head of three Scottish regiments of foot, commanded 
by Sir John Hepburn, with express directions from 
the colonel to keep by hioi. Our post was in the 
second line, as a reserve to the King of Sweden's 
main battle, and, which was strange, the main battle, 
which consisted of four great brigades of foot, were 
never charged during the whole fight ; dnd yet we,, 
who had the reserve, were obliged to endure the whole 
weight of the Imperial army. The occasion was, the 
right wing of the Imperialists having defeated the 
Saxons, and being eager in the chase, Tilly, who was 
an old soldier, and ready to prevent all mistakes, for- 
bids any pursuit. " Let them go,'' says he, ** but let 
us beat the Swedes, or we do nothing.'' Upon this the 
victorious troops fell in upon the flank of the king's 
army, which, the Saxons being fled, lay open to them. 
Gustavus Horn commanded the left wing of the 
Swedes, and having first defeated some regiments 
which charged him, falls in upon the rear of the 
Imperial right wing, and separates them from the 
van, who were advanced a great way forward in pur- 
suit of the Saxons, and having routed the said rear 
or reserve, falls on upon Tilly's main battle, and de- 
feated part of them ; the other part was gone in chase 
[71] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

of the Saxons, and now also returned, fell in upon the 
rear of the left wing of the Swedes, charging them 
in the flank, for they drew up upon the very ground 
which the Saxons had quitted. This changed the 
whole front, and made the Swedes face about to the 
left, and make a great front on their flank to make 
this good. Our brigades, who were placed as a 
reserve for the main battle, were, by special order 
from the king, wheeled about to the left, and placed 
for the right of this new front to charge the Im- 
perialists ; they were about 12,000 of their best foot, 
besides horse, and, flushed with the execution of the 
Saxons, fell on like furies. The king by this time 
had almost defeated the Imperialists^ left wing; their 
horse, with more haste than good speed, had charged 
faster than their foot could follow, and having broke 
into the king^s flrst line, he let them go, where, while 
the second line bears the shock, and bravely resisted 
them, the king follows them on the crupper with 
thirteen troops of horse, and some musketeers, by 
which being hemmed in, they were all cut down in a 
moment as it were, and the army never disordered 
with them. This fatal blow to the left wing gave 
the king more leisure to defeat the foot which fol- 
lowed, and to send some assistance to Gustavus Horn 
in his left wing, who had his hands fiill with the main 
battle of the Imperialists. 

But those troops who, as I said, had routed the 
Saxons, being called off from the pursuit, had charged 
our flank, and were now grown very strong, renewed 
the battle in a terrible manner. Here it was I saw 
our men go to wreck. Colonel Hall, a brave soldier, 
[78] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

commanded the rear of the Swedes* left wing ; he 
fought like a lion, but was slain, and most of his 
regiment cut off, though not unrevenged, for they 
entirely ruined Furstenberg's regiment of foot. 
Colonel Cullembach, with his regiment of horse, was 
extremely overlaid also, and the colonel and many 
brave officers killed, and in short all that wing was 
shattered, and in an ill condition. 

In this juncture came the king, and having seen 
what havoc the enemy made of CuUembach^'s troops, 
he comes riding along the front of our three brigades, 
and himself led us on to the charge ; the colonel of 
his guards, the Baron Dyvel, was shot dead just as 
the king had given him some orders. When the 
Scots advanced, seconded by some regiments of horse 
which the king also sent to the charge, the bloodiest 
fight began that ever men beheld, for the Scottish 
brigades, giving fire three ranks at a time over one 
another's heads, poured in their shot so thick, that 
the enemy were cut down like grass before a scythe ; 
and following into the thickest of their foot with the 
clubs of their muskets made a most dreadful slaughter, 
and yet was there no flying. Tilly's men might be 
killed and knocked down, but no man turned his 
back, nor would give an inch of ground, but as they 
were wheeled, or marched, or retreated by their 
officers. 

There was a regiment of cuirassiers which stood 
whole to the last, and fought like lions ; they went 
ranging over the field when all their army was broken, 
and nobody cared for charging them ; they were 
commanded by Baron Kronenburg, and at last went 
[78] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

off from the battle whole. These were armed in 
black annour from head to foot, and they carried off 
their generaL About six o^clock the field was 
cleared of the enemy, except at one place on the 
king'^s side, where some of them rallied, and though 
they knew all was lost would take no quarter, but 
fought it out to the last man, being found dead 
the next day in rank and file as they were drawn up. 

I had the good fortune to receive no hurt in this 
battle, excepting a small scratch on the side of my 
neck by the push of a pike ; but my friend received 
a very dangerous wound when the battle was as good 
as over. He had engaged with a German colonel, 
whose name we could never learn, and having killed 
his man, and pressed very close upon him, so that he 
had shot his horse, the hoi-se in the fall kept the 
colonel down, lying on one of his legs ; upon which 
he demanded quarter, which Captain Fielding grant- 
ing, helped him to quit his horse, and having 
disarmed him, was bringing him into the line, when 
the regiment of cuirassiers, which I mentioned, com- 
manded by Baron Kronenburg, came roving over the 
field, and with a flying charge saluted our front with 
a salvo of carbine shot, which wounded us a great 
many men, and among the rest the captain received 
a shot in his thigh, which laid him on the ground, 
and being separated from the line, his prisoner got 
away with them. 

This was the first service I was in, and indeed I 
never saw any fight since maintained with such gal- 
lantry, such desperate valour, together with such 
dexterity of management, both sides^being composed 
[741 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

of soldiers fully tried, bred to the wars, expert in 
everything, exact in their order, and incapable of 
fear, which made the battle be much more bloody 
than usual. Sir John Hepburn, at my request, took 
particular care of my comrade, and sent his own sur- 
geon to look after him; and afterwards, when the 
city of Leipsic was retaken, provided him lodgings 
there, and came very often to see him ; and indeed I 
was in great care for him too, the surgeons being 
very doubtful of him a great while ; for having lain 
in the field all night among the dead, his wound, for 
want of dressing, and with the extremity of cold, 
was in a very ill condition, and the pain of it had 
thrown him into a fever. TT was quite dusk before 
the fight ended, especially where the last rallied 
troops fought so long, and therefore we durst not 
break our order to seek out our friends, so that 
^t was near seven o^'clock the next morning before we 
found the captain, who, though very weak by the 
loss of blood, had raised himself up, and placed his 
back against the buttock of a dead horse. I was 
the first that knew him, and running to him, em- 
braced him with a great deal of joy ; he was not 
able to speak, but made signs to let me see he knew 
me, so we brought him into the camp, and Sir John 
Hepburn, as I noted before, sent his own surgeons 
to look after him. 

The darkness of the night prevented any pursuit, 
and was the only refuge the enemy had left ; for had 
there been three hours more daylight ten thousand 
more lives had been lost, for the Swedes (and Saxons 
especially) enraged by the obstinacy of the enemy, 
[76] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

were so thoroughly heated that they would have 
given quarter but to few. The retreat was not 
sounded till seven o^clock, when the king drew up 
the whole anny upon the field of battle, and gave 
strict command that none should stir from their 
order ; so the army lay under their arms all night, 
which was another reason why the wounded soldiers 
suffered very much by the cold ; for the king, who 
had a bold enemy to deal with, was not ignomnt 
what a small body of desperate men rallied together 
might have done in the darkness of the night, and 
therefore he lay in his coach all night at the head 
of the line, though it froze very hard. 

As soon as the day began to peep the trumpets 
sounded to horse, and all the dragoons and light- 
horse in the army were commanded to the pursuit 
The cuirassier and some commanded musketeers 
advanced some miles, if need were, to make good 
their retreat, and all the foot stood to their arms for 
a reserve ; but in half-an-hour word was brought to 
the king that the enemy were quite dispersed, upon 
which detachments were made out of every regiment 
to search among the dead for any of our friends 
that were wounded ; and the king himself gave a 
stiict order, that if any were found wounded and 
alive among the enemy none should kill them, but 
take care to bring them into the camp — a piece of 
humanity which saved the lives of near a thousand 
of the enemies. 

This piece of service being over, the enemy's camp 
was seized upon, and the soldiers were permitted to 
plunder it ; all the cannon, arms, and ammunition 
[76] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

was secured for the king^s use, the rest was given up 
to the soldiers, who found so much plunder that 
they had no reason to quarrel for shares. 

For my share, I was so busy with my wounded 
captain that I got nothing but a sword, which I 
found just by him when I first saw him ; but my 
man brought me a very good horse with a furniture 
on him, and one pistol of extraordinary workmanship. 

I bade him get upon his back and make the best 
of the day for himself, which he did, and I saw him 
no more till three days after, when he found me out 
at Leipsic, so richly dressed that I hardly knew him ; 
and after making his excuse for his long absence, 
gave me a very pleasant account where he had been. 
He told me that, according to my order, being 
mounted on the horse he had brought me, he first 
rid into the field among the dead to get some clothes 
suitable to the equipage of his horse, and having 
seized on a laced coat, a helmet, a sword, and an 
extraordinary good cane, was resolved to see what 
was become of the enemy ; and following the track 
of the dragoons, which he could easily do by the 
bodies on the road, he fell in with a small party 
of twenty-five dragoons, under no command but a 
corporal, making to a village where some of the 
enemies^ horse had been quartered. The dragoons, 
taking him for an officer by his horse, desired him to 
command them, told him the enemy was very rich, 
and they doubted not a good booty. He was a bold, 
brisk fdlow, and told them, with all his heart, but 
said he had but one pistol, the other being broken 
with firing ; so they lent him a pair of pistols, and a 
[77] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

small piece they had taken» and he led them on. 
There had been a regiment of horse and some troops 
of Crabats in the village, but they were fled on the 
first notice of the pursuit, excepting three troops, 
and these, on sight of this smdl party, supposing 
them to be only the first of a greater number, fled in 
the greatest confusion imaginable. They took the 
village, and about fifty horses, with all the plunder 
of the enemy, and with the heat of the service he 
had spoiled my horse, he said, for which he had 
brought me two more ; for he, passing for the com- 
mander of the party, had all the advantage the 
custom of war gives an officer in like cases, 

I was very well pleased with the relation the fellow 
gave me, and, laughing at him, "Well, captain,** 
said I, " and what plunder have ye got ?** " Enough 
to make me a captain, sir,** says he, " if you please, 
and a troop ready raised too ; for the party of dra- 
goons are posted in the village by my command, till 
they have farther orders.** In short, he pulled out 
sixty or seventy pieces of gold, five or six watches, 
thirteen or fourteen rings, whereof two were diamond 
rings, one of which was worth fifty dollars, silver as 
much as his pockets would hold ; besides that he 
had brought three horses, two of which were laden 
with baggage, and a boor he had hired to stay with 
them at Leipsic till he had found me out. " But I 
am afraid, captain," says I, " you have plundered the 
village instead of plundering the enemy.** "No 
indeed, not we,** says he, " but the Crabats had done 
it for us, and we light of them just as they were 
carrying itoflF." "Well,** said I, "but what will 
[78] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

you do with your men, for when you come to give 
them orders they will know you well enough?'* 
** No, no,'' says he, ** I took care of that, for just 
now I gave a soldier five dollars to carry them news 
that the army was marched to Merseburg, and that 
they should follow thither to the regiment.** 

Having secured his money in my lodgings, he 
asked me if I pleased to see his horses, and to have 
one for myself? I told him I would go and see 
them in the afternoon ; but the fellow being im- 
patient goes and fetches them. There was three 
horses, one whereof was a very good one, and by the 
furniture was an officer's horse of the Crabats, and 
that my man would have me accept, for the other 
he had spoiled, as he said. I was but indifferently 
horsed before, so I accepted of the horse, and went 
down with him to see the rest of his plunder there. 
He had got three or four pair of pistols, two or three 
bundles of officers' linen, and lace, a field-bed, and a 
tent, and several other things of value ; but at last, 
coming to a small fai*del, "And this," says he, "I 
took whole from a Crabat running away with it under 
his arm," so he brought it up into my chamber. 
He had not looked into it, he said, but he under- 
stood 'twas some plunder the soldiers had made, 
and finding it heavy took it by consent. We opened 
it and found it was a bundle of some linen, thirteen 
or fourteen pieces of plate, and in a small cup, three 
rings, a fine necklace of pearl, and the value of 100 
rix-doUars in money. 

The fellow was amazed at his own good fortune, 
and hardly knew what to do with himself; I bid him 
[79] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

go take care of his other things, and of his horses, 
and come again. So he went and discharged the 
boor that waited and packed up all his plunder, and 
came up to me in his old clothes again, ^^How 
now, captain,^ says I, " what, have you altered your 
equipage already ? ^ ^^ I am no more ashamed, sir, 
of your livery,^ answered he, ** than of your service, 
and neverthdess your servant for what I have got 
by if ** Well,^ says I to him, ** but what will you 
do now with all your money ? ** ** I wish my poor 
father had some of it,^ says he, ^ and for the rest I 
got it for you, sir, and desire you would take if 
He spoke it with so much honesty and freedom that 
I could not but take it very kindly ; but, however, I 
told him I would not take a farthing from him as 
his master, but I would have him play the good 
husband with it, now he had such good fortune to 
get it. He told me he would take my directions in 
everything. "Why, then,** said I, "111 tell you 
what I would advise you to do, turn it all into ready 
money, and convey it by return home into England, 
and follow yourself the first opportunity, and with 
good management you may put yourself in a good 
posture of living with it.'* The fellow, with a sort 
of dejection in his looks, asked me if he had dis- 
obliged me in anything ? " Why ? " says I. " That 
I was willing to turn him out of his service.'* " No, 
George " (that was his name) says I, " but you may 
live on this money without being a servant." " I 'd 
throw it all into the Elbe," says he, ** over Torgau 
bridge, rather than leave your service ; and besides," 
says he, " can't I save my money without going from 
[80], 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

you ? I got it in your service, and I ^11 never spend 
it out of your service, unless you put me away. I 
hope my money won^t make me the worse servant ; 
if I thought it would, I M soon have little enough.^ 
" Nay, George,** says I, ** I shall not oblige you to it, 
for I am not willing to lose you neither : come, then,** 
says I, ^*let us put it all together, and see what it 
will come to.** So he laid it all together on the 
table, and by our computation he had gotten as 
much plunder as was worth about 1400 rix-dollars, 
besides three horses with their furniture, a tent, a 
bed, and some wearing linen. Then he takes the 
necklace of pearl, a very good watch, a diamond 
ring, and 100 pieces of gold, and ]ays them by them- 
selves, and having, according to our best calculation, 
valued the things, he put up all the rest, and as I 
was going to ask him what they were left out for, 
he takes them up in his hand, and coming round 
the table, told me, that if I did not think him un- 
worthy of my service and favour, he begged I would 
give him leave to make that pi*esent to me ; that it 
was my first thought his going out, that he had got 
it all in my service, and he should think I had no 
kindness for him if I should refuse it. 

I was resolved in my mind not to take it from him, 
and yet I could find no means to resist his impor- 
tunity. At last I told him, I would accept of part 
of his present, and that I esteemed his respect in 
that as much as the whole, and that I would not 
have him impoi*tune me further ; so I took the ring 
and watch, with the horse and furniture as before, 
and made him turn all the rest into money at Leipsic, 
« [81] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

and not suffering him to wear his livery, made him 
put himself into a tolerable equipage, and taking a 
young Leipsicer into my service, he attended me as 
a gentleman from that time forward. 

The king^s army never entered Leipsic, but pro- 
ceeded to Merseburg, and from thence to Halle, and 
so marched on into Franconia, while the Duke of 
Saxony employed his forces in recovering Leipsic 
and driving the Imperialists out of his country. I 
continued at Leipsic twelve days, being not willing 
to leave my comrade till he was recovered ; but Sir 
John Hepburn so often importuned me to come into 
the army, and sent me word that the king had very 
often inquii*ed for me, that at last I consented to go 
without him; so having made our appointment 
where to meet, and how to correspond by letters, I 
went to wait on Sir John Hepburn, who then lay 
with the king^s army at the city of Erfurt in Saxony. 
As I was riding between Leipsic and Halle, I observed 
my horse went very awkwardly and uneasy, and 
sweat very much, though the weather was cold, and 
we had rid but very softly ; I fancied therefore that 
the saddle might hurt the horse, and calls my new 
captain up. " George,** says I, " I believe this saddle 
hurts the horse.** So we alighted, and looking under 
the saddle found the back of the horse extremely 
galled ; so I bid him take off the saddle, which he 
did, and giving the horse to my young Leipsicer to 
lead, we sat down to see if we could mend it, for 
there was no town near us. Says George, pointing 
with his finger, " If you please to cut open the pan- 
nel there, 1*11 get something to stuff into it which 
[88] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

will bear it from the horse^s back.^ i So while he 
looked for something to thrust in, I cut 'a hole in thc^ 
pannel of the saddle, and, following it with my 
finger, I felt something hard, which seemed to move 
up and down. Again, as I thnist it with my finger^ 
"Here^s something that should not be here,'' says 
I, not yet imagining what afterwards ' fell out, and 
calling, ** Run back,^ bade him put up his finger. 
"Whatever ^tis,** says he, **'tis this hurls the horse, 
for it bears just on his back when the saddle is set 
on." So we strove to take hold on it, but. could n6t 
reach it ; at last we took the upper part of the saddle 
quite from the pannel, and there lay a small silk 
purse wrapped in a piece of leather, and full of gold 
ducats. ** Thou art bom to be rich, George,'* says I 
to him, "here's more money." We opened th6 
purse and found in it four hundred and' thirty-eight 
small pieces of gold. 

There I had a new skirmish with faim whose the 
money should be. I told him 'twas his, he told nie 
no ; I had accepted of the horse and furniture, and 
all that was about him was mine, and solemnly 
vowed he would not have a penny of it. ' I saw no 
remedy, but put up the money for the present, 
mended our saddle, and went on. We lay that 
night at Halle, and having had such a' booty in the 
saddle, I made him search the saddles of the other 
two horses, in one of which we found three French 
crowns, but nothing in the other. ' ^ 

We arrived at Erfurt the 28th of September, but 
the army was removed, and entered into Franconia, 
and at the siege of Koningshoven we dime tip with 
[88] 



Digitized by 



Godgk 



MJSMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

them. The first thing I did was to pay my civili- 
ties to Sir John Hepburn, who received me very 
kindly, but told me withal that I had not done weU 
to be so long from him, and the king had particu- 
larly inquired for me, had commanded him to bring 
ine to him at my return. I told him the reason of 
my stay at Leipsic, and how I had left that place 
and my comrade, before he was cured of his wounds, 
to wait on him according to his letters. He told 
me the king had spoken some things very obliging 
about me, and he believed would offer me some com- 
mand in the army, if I thought well to accept of 
it. I told him I had promised my father not to 
take service ' in an army without his leave, and yet 
if his Majesty should offer it, I neither knew how 
to resist it, nor had I an inclination to anything 
more than the service, and such a leader, though I 
had much rather have served as a volunteer at my 
own charge (which, as he knew, was the custom of 
our English gentlemen) than in any command. He 
replied, *^ Do as you think fit ; but some gentlemen 
would give 20,000 crowns to stand so fair for ad- 
vancement as you do.^ 

The town of Koningshoven capitulated that day, 
and Sir John was ordered to treat with the citizens, 
so I had no. further discourse with him then ; and the 
town being taken, the army immediately advanced 
4own the river Maine, for the king had his eye upon 
Frankfort and Mentz, two great cities, both which 
he soon became master of, chiefly by the prodigious 
expedition of his march; for within a month after 
the battle, he was in the lower parts of the empire, 

[8*] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

and had passed from the Elbe to the Rhine, an 
inoredible conquest, had taken all the strong cities, 
the bishoprics of Bamberg, of Wurtzbuig, and almost 
all the circle of Franconia, with part of Schawberland 
— a conquest large enough to be seven years a-making 
by the common course of arms. 

Business going on thus, the king had not leisure to 
think of smedl matters, and I being not thoroughly 
resolved in my mind, did not press Sir John to intro- 
duce me. I had wrote to my father with an account 
of my reception in the army, the civilities of Sir John 
Hepburn, the particulars of the battle, and had 
indeed pressed him to give me leave to serve the 
King of Sweden, to which particular I waited for an 
answer, but the following occasion determined me 
before an answer could possibly reach me. 

The king was before the strong castle of Marien* 
buig, which commands the city of Wurtzburg. He 
had taken the city, but the garrison and richer part 
of the burghers were retired into the castle, and 
trusting to the strength of the place, which was 
thought impregnable, they bade the Swedes do their 
worst ; ^t was well provided with all things, and a 
strong garrison in it, so that the army indeed expected 
't would be a long piece of work. The castle stood 
on a high rock, and on the steep of the rock was a 
bastion which defended the only passage up the hill 
into the castle ; the Scots were chose out to make 
this attack, and the king was an eye-witness of their 
gallantry. In the action Sir John was not com- 
manded out, but Sir James Ramsey led them on ; 
but I observed that most of the Scotch officers in the 
[86] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

other regiments prepared to serve as volunteers for 
the honour of their countrymen, and Sir John Hep- 
bum led them on. I was resolved to see this piece 
&lt;(f . service, and therefore joined myself to the volun- 
teers. We wer^ armed with partisans, and each man 
two pistols at our belt. It was a piece of service 
that seemed perfectly desperate, the advantage of the 
bm, the precipice we were to mount, the height of 
the bastion^ the resolute courage and number of the 
gfirrison, who from a complete covert made a terrible 
iir^ upon us,,.all joined to make the action hopeless. 
But the fury of the Scots musketeers was not to be 
a^f^ted by, any difficulties; they mounted the hill, 
scaled the works like madmen, running upon the 
eriemies^ pfkes, and after two hours^ desperate fight 
in the midst of fire and smoke, took it by storm, and 
ppt all the garrison to the sword. The volunteers 
did their part, and had their share of the loss too, for 
thirteen or fourteen were killed out of thirty-seven, 
besides the, wounded, among whom I received a hurt 
more troublesome than dangerous by a thrust of a 
halberd into my arm, which proved a very painful 
wound, ai^d , I was a great while before it was 
thoroughly recovered. 

., The king received us as we drew off at the foot of 
the hill, calling the soldiers his brave Scots, and 
commending the officers by name. The next morn- 
ing the c^tle was also taken by storm, and the 
greatest booty that ever was found in any one con- 
quest in the whole war ; the soldiers got here so 
much money that they knew not what to do with it, 
and the plunder they got here and at the battle' 
[86], 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

of Leipsic made them so unruly, that had not the 
king been the best master of discipline in the world, 
they had never been kept in any reasonable bounds. 

The king had taken notice of our small party of 
volunteers, and though I thought he had not seen 
me, yet he sent the next morning for Sir John Hep- 
bum, and asked him if I were not come to the army? 
" Yes,** says Sir John, " he has been here two or 
three days.^ And as he was forming an excuse for 
not having brought me to wait on his Majesty, says 
the king, interrupting him, ** I wonder you would let 
him thrust himself into such a hot piece of service as 
storming the Port Graft. Pray let him know I saw 
him, and have a very good account of his behaviour.'" 
Sir John returned with his account to me, and pressed 
me to pay my duty to his Majesty the next morning ; 
and accordingly, though I had but an ill night with 
the pain of my wound, I was with him at the lev^ 
in the castle. 

I cannot but give some short account of the glory 
of the morning ; the castle had been cleared of the 
dead bodies of the enemies, and what was not pillaged 
by the soldiers was placed under a guard. There 
was first a magazine of very good arms for about 
18,000 or 20,000 foot, and 4000 horse, a very good 
train of artillery of about eighteen pieces of battery, 
thirty-two brass field-pieces, and four mortars. The 
bishop^s treasure, and other public monies not plun- 
dered by the soldiers, was telling out by the officers, 
and amounted to 400,000 florins in money ; and the 
burghers of the town in solemn procession, bare- 
headed, brought the king three tons of gold as a 
[87] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

composition to exempt the city from plunder. Here 
was also a stable of gallant horses which the king 
had the curiosity to go and see. 

When the ceremony of the buighers was over, the 
king came down into the castle court, walked on the 
parade (where the great train of artillery was placed 
on their carriages) and round the walls, and gave order 
for repairing the bastion that was stormed by the ' 
Scots ; and as at the entrance of the parade Sir John 
Hepburn and I made our reverence to the king, 
*^ Ho, cavalier ! '^ said the king to me, '^ I am glad to 
see you,^ and so passed forward. I made my bow 
very low, but his Majesty said no more at that 
time. 

When the view was over the king went up into the 
lodgings, and Sir John and I walked in an ante- 
chamber for about a quarter of an hour, when one of 
the gentlemen of the bedchamber came out to Sir 
John, and told him the king asked for him ; he 
stayed but a little with the king, and come out to 
me and told me the king had ordered him to bring 
me to him. 

His Majesty, with a countenance full of honour 
and goodness, interrupted my compliment, and asked 
me how I did ; at which answering only with a bow, 
says the king, ^^ I am sorry to see you are hurt ; I 
would have laid my commands on you not to have 
shown yourself in so sharp a piece of service, if I had 
known you had been in the camp.*** ** Your Majesty 
does me too much honour,'* said I, *' in your care of 
a life that has yet done nothing to deserve your 
favour.** His Majesty was pleased to say something 
[88] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

very kind to me relating to my behaviour in the 
battle of Leipsic, which I have not vanity enough to 
write ; at the conclusion whereof, when I replied very 
humbly that I was not sensible that any service I had 
done, or could do, could possibly merit so much 
goodness, he told me he had ordered me a small tes- 
timony of his esteem, and withal gave me his hand 
to kiss. I was now conquered, and with a sort of 
surprise told his Majesty I found myself so much 
engaged by his goodness, as well as my own inclina- 
tion, that if his Majesty would please to accept of 
my devoir, I was resolved to serve in his araiy, or 
wherever he pleased to command me. " Serve me,** 
says the king, ^* why, so you do, but I must not have 
you be a musketeer ; a poor soldier at a dollar a week 
will do that." "Pray, Sir John,"** says the king, 
"give him what commission he desires." ** No com- 
mission, sir," says I, ** would please me better than 
leave to fight near your Majesty^s person, and to 
serve you at my own charge till I am qualified by 
more experience to receive your commands." " Why, 
then, it shall be so," said the king, " and I charge 
you, Hepburn," says he, ** when anything offers that 
is either fit for him, or he desires, that you tell 
me of it ; " and giving me his hand again to kiss, I 
withdrew. 

I was followed before I had passed the castle gate 
by one of the king'^s pages, who brought me a war* 
rant, directed to Sir John Hepburn, to go to the 
master of the horse for an immediate delivery of 
things ordered by the king himself for my account, 
where being come, the equerry produced me a very 
[89] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

good coadi with four horses, harness, and equipage, 
and two very fine saddle-horses, out of the stable of 
the bishop^s horses aforementioned ; with these there 
was a list for three servants, and a warrant to the 
steward of the king^s baggage to defray me, my 
horses, and servants at the king^s charge till farther 
order. I was very much at a loss how to manage 
myself in this so strange freedom of so great a prince, 
and consulting with Sir John Hepburn, I was pro- 
posing to him whether it was not proper to go im- 
mediately back to pay my duty to his Majesty, and 
acknowledge his bounty in the best terms I could, 
but while we were resolving to do so, the guards 
stood to their arms, and we saw the king go out at 
the gate in his coach to pass into the city, so we 
were diverted fix)m it for that time, I acknowledge 
the bounty of the king was very surprising, but I 
must say it was not so very strange to me when 
I afterwards saw the course of his management. 
Bounty in him was his natural talent, but he never 
distributed his favours but where he thought him- 
self both loved and faithfully served, and when he 
was so, even the single actions of his private soldiers 
he would take particular notice of himself, and 
publicly own, acknowledge, and reward them, of 
which I am obliged to give some instances. 

A private musketeer at the storming the castle of 
Wurtzburg, when all the detachment was beaten off, 
stood in the face of the enemy and fired his piece, 
and though he had a thousand shot made at him, 
stood unconcerned, and charged his piece again, and 
let fly at the enemy, continuing to do so three times, 
[90] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

at the same time beckoning with his hand to his 
fellows to come on again, which they did, animated 
by his example, and carried the place for the king. 

When the town was taken the king ordered the 
regiment to be drawn out, and calling for that 
soldier, thanked him before them all for taking the 
town for him, gave him a thousand dollars in money, 
and a commission with his own hand for a foot com- 
pany, or leave to go home, which he would. The 
soldier took the commission on his knees, kissed it, 
and put it into his bosom, and told the king, he 
would never leave his service as long as he lived. 

This bounty of the king^ timed and suited by 
his judgment, was the reason that he was very well 
served, entirely beloved, and most punctually obeyed 
by his soldiers, who were sure to be cherished and 
encouraged if they did well, having the king generally 
an eye-witness of their behaviour. 

My indiscretion rather than valour had engaged 
me so far at the battle of Leipsic, that being in the 
van of Sir John Hepbum'^s brigade, almost three 
whole companies of us wei-e separated from our line, 
and surrounded by the enemies^ pikes. I cannot but 
say also that we were disengaged rather by a des- 
perate charge Sir John made with the whole regiment 
to fetch us off, than by our own valour, though we 
were not wanting to ourselves neither, but this part 
of the action being talked of very much to the ad- 
vantage of the young English volunteer, and possibly 
more than I deserved, was the occasion of all the 
distinction the king used me with ever after. 

I had by this time letters from my father, in 
[91] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

whichy though with some reluctance, he left me at 
liberty to enter into arms if I thought fit, always 
obliging me to be directed, and, as he said, com- 
manded by Sir John Hepburn. At the same time 
he wrote to Sir John Hepburn, commending his 
son^s fortunes, as he called it, to his care, which 
letters Sir John showed the king unknown to me. 

I took care always to acquaint my father of every 
circumstance, and forgot not to mention his Majesty^s 
extraordinary favour, which so affected my father, 
that he obtained a very honourable mention of it in 
a letter from King Charles to the King of Sweden, 
written by his own hand. 

I had waited on his Majesty, with Sir John Hep- 
bum, to give him thanks for his magnificent present, 
and was received with his usual goodness, and after 
that I was every day among the gentlemen of his 
ordinary attendance. And if his Majesty went out 
on a party, as he would often do, or to view the 
country, I always attended him among the volunteers, 
of whom a great many always followed him ; and 
he would often call me out, talk with me, send me 
upon messages to towns, to princes, free cities, and 
the like, upon extraordinary occasions. 

Tlie first piece of service he put me upon had like 
to have embroiled me with one of his favourite 
colonels. The king was marching through the Berg- 
straet, a low country on the edge of the Rhine, and, 
as all men thought, was going to besiege Heidelberg, 
but on a sudden orders a party of his guards, with 
five companies of Scots, to be drawn out ; while they 
were drawing out this detachment the king calls roe 
[9«] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

to him, ^* Ho, cavalier,^ says he, that was his usual 
word, ^* you shall command this party ;^ and thereupon 
gives me orders to march back all night, and in the 
morning, by break of day, to take post under the 
walls of the fort of Oppenheim, and immediately to 
entrench myself as well as I could. Grave Neels, 
the colonel of his guards, thought himself injured by 
this command, but the king took the matter upon 
himself, and Grave Neels told me very familiarly 
afterwards, " We have such a master,'' says he, " that 
no man can be affronted by. I thought myself 
wronged," says he, ** when you commanded my men 
over my head ; and for my life,'' says he, " I knew 
not which way to be angry." 

I executed my commission so punctually that by 
break of day I was set down within musket-shot of 
the fort, under covert of a little mount, on which 
stood a windmill, and had indifferently fortified 
myself, and at the same time had posted some of 
my men on two other passes, but at farther dis- 
tance from the fort, so that the fort was effectually 
blocked up on the land side. In the afternoon the 
enemy sallied on my first entrenchment, but being 
coveied from their cannon, and defended by a ditch 
which I had drawn across the road, they were so 
well received by my musketeers that they retired 
with the loss of six or seven men. 

The next day Sir John Hepburn was sent with two 
brigades of foot to carry on the work, and so my 
commission ended. The king expressed himself very 
well pleased with what I had done, and when he was 
so was never sparing of telling of it, for he used to 
[93] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

say that public commendations were a great en- 
couragement to valour. 

While Sir John Hepburn lay before the fort and 
was preparing to storm it, the king^s design was to 
get over the Rhine, but the Spaniards which were in 
Oppenheim had sunk all the boats they could find. 
At last the king, being informed where some lay that 
were sunk, caused them to be weighed with all the 
expedition possible, and in the night of the 7th of 
December, in three boats, passed over his regiment 
of guards, about three miles above the town, and, as 
the king thought, secure from danger ; but they were 
no sooner landed, and not drawn into order, but they 
vrere charged by a body of Spanish horse, and had 
not the darkness given them opportunity to draw up 
in the enclosures in several little parties, they had 
been in great danger of being disordered ; but by 
this means they lined the hedges and lanes so with 
musketeers, that the remainder had time to draw up 
in battalia, and saluted the horse with their muskets, 
so that they drew farther off. 

The king was very impatient, hearing his men 
engaged, having no boats nor possible means to get 
over to help them. At last, about eleven o^clock at 
night, the boats came back, and the king thrust 
another regiment into them, and though his officers 
dissuaded him, would go over himself with them on 
foot, and did so. This was three months that very 
day when the battle of Leipsic was fought, and winter 
time too, that the progress of his arms had spread 
from the Elbe, where it parts Saxony and Branden- 
burg, to the Lower Palatinate and the Rhine. 
[94] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

I went over in the boat with the king. I never saw 
him in so much concern in my life, for he was in pain 
for his men ; but before we got on shore the Spaniards 
retired. However, the king landed, ordered his men, 
and prepared to entrench, but he had not time, for by 
that time the boats were put off again, the Spaniards, 
not knowing more troops were landed, and being rein- 
forced from Oppenheim, came on again, and charged 
with great fury ; but all things were now in order, 
and they were readily received and beaten back again. 
They came on again the third time, and with repeated 
charges attacked us ; but at last finding us too strong 
for them they gave it over. By this time another 
regiment of foot was come over, and as soon as day 
appeared the king with the three regiments marched 
to the town, which surrendered at the first sum- 
mons, and the next day the fort yielded to Sir John 
Hepburn. 

The castle at Oppenheim held out still with a 
garrison of 800 Spaniards, and the king, leaving SOO 
Scots of Sir James Ramsey^s men in the town, drew 
out to attack the castle. Sir James Ramsey being 
left wounded at Wurtzburg, the king gave me the 
command of those 200 men, which were a regiment, 
that is to say, all that were left of a gallant regiment 
of 2000 Scots, which the king brought out of Sweden 
with him, under that brave colonel. There was about 
thirty officers, who, having no soldiers, were yet in pay, 
and served as reformadoes with the regiment^ and were 
over and above the 200 men. 

The king designed to storm the castle on the lower 
side by the way that leads to Mentz, and Sir John 
[96] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Hepburn landed from the other side and marched 
up to storm on the Rhine port. 

My reformado Scots, having observed that the 
town port of the castle was not so well guarded as 
the rest, all the eyes of the garrison being bent 
towards the king and Sir John Hepburn, came run- 
ning to me, and told me they believed they could 
enter the castle, sword in hand, if I would give them 
leave. I told them I durst not give them orders, 
my commission being only to keep and defend the 
town ; but they being very importunate, I told them 
they were volunteers, and might do what they pleased, 
that I would lend them fifty men, and draw up the 
rest to second them, or bring them off, as I saw oc- 
casion, so as I might not hazard the town. This 
was as much as they desired ; they sallied immediately, 
and in a trice the volunteers scaled the port, cut in 
pieces the guard, and burst open the gate, at which 
the fifty entered. Finding the gate won, I advanced 
immediately with 100 musketeers more, having locked 
up all the gates of the town but the castle port, and 
leaving fifty still for a reserve just at that gate ; the 
townsmen, too, seeing the castle, as it were, taken, 
run to arms, and followed me with above SOO men. 
The Spaniards were knocked down by the Scots be- 
fore they knew what the matter was, and the king 
and Sir John Hepburn, advancing to storm, were 
surprised when, instead of resistance, they saw the 
Spaniards throwing themselves over the walls to 
avoid the fury of the Scots. Few of the garrison 
got away, but were either killed or taken, and having 
cleared the castle^ I set open the port on the king^s 
[96] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

side, and sent his Majesty word the castle was his 
own. The king came on, and entered on foot. I 
received him at the head of the Scots reformadoes, 
who all saluted him with their pikes. The king 
gave them his hat, and turning about, ** Brave Scots, 
brave Scots,^ says he smiling, " you were too quick 
for me ; ^ then beckoning to me, made me tell him 
how and in what manner we had managed the storm, 
which he was exceeding well pleased with, but espe- 
cially at the caution I had used to bring them off if 
they had miscarried, and secured the town. 

From hence the army marched to Mentz, which in 
four days^ time capitulated, with the fort and citadel, 
and the city paid his Majesty 300,000 dollars to be 
exempted from the fury of the soldiers. Here the 
king himself drew the plan of those invincible forti* 
fications which to this day makes it one of the 
strongest cities in Germany. 

Friburg, Eoningstien, Neustadt, Kaiserslautem, 
and almost all the Lower Palatinate, surrendered at 
the very terror of the King of Sweden'^s approach, 
and never suffered the danger of a siege. 

The king held a most magnificent court at Mentz, 
attended by the Landgrave of Hesse, with an incred- 
ible number of princes and lords of the empire, with 
ambassadors and residents of foreign princes; and 
here his Majesty stayed till March, when the queen, 
with a great retinue of Swedish nobility, came from 
Erfurt to see him. The king, attended by a gallant 
train of German nobility, went to Frankfort, and 
from thence on to Hoest, to meet the queen, where 
her Majesty arrived February 8. 
7 [91] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

During the king's stay in these parts, his armies 
were not idle, his troops, on one side under the 
Rhinegrave, a brave and ever-fortunate commander, 
and under the Landgrave of Hesse, on the other, 
mnged the country from Lorraine to Luxembui^, 
and past the Moselle on the west, and the Weser on 
the north. Nothing could stand before them : the 
Spanish army which came to the relief of the Catho- 
lic Electors was everywhere defeated and beaten 
quite out of the country, and the Lorraine army 
quite iTiined. ^ was a most pleasant court sure as 
ever w€w seen, where every day expresses arrived of 
armies defeated, towns surrendered, contributions 
agreed upon, parties routed, prisoners taken, and 
princes sending ambassadors to sue for truces and 
neutralities, to make submissions and compositions, 
and to pay arrears and contributions. 

Here arrived, February 10, the King of Bohemia 
from England, and with him my Lord Craven, with 
a body of Dutch horse, and a very fine train of 
English volunteers, who immediately, without any 
stay, marched on to Hoest to wait upon his Majesty 
of Sweden, who received him with a great deal of 
civility, and was treated at a noble collation by the 
king and queen at Frankfort. Never had the un- 
fortunate king so fair a prospect of being restored 
to his inheritance of the Palatinate as at that time« 
and had King James, his father-in-law, had a soul 
answerable to the occasion, it had been effected be- 
fore, but it was a strange thing to see him equipped 
from the English court with one lord and about 
forty or fifty English gentlemen in his attendance, 
[98] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

whereas had the King of England now, as ^t is well 
known he might have done, furnished him with 
10,000 or 12,000 English foot, nothing could have 
hindered him taking a full possession of his country ; 
and yet even without that help did the King of 
Sweden dear almost his whole country of Impe- 
rialists, and after his death reinstal his son in the 
Electorate : but no thanks to us. 

The Lord Craven did me the honour to inquire 
for me by name, and his Majesty of Sweden did me 
yet more by presenting me to the King of Bohemia, 
and my Lord Craven gave me a letter from my father. 
And speaking something of my father having served 
under the Prince of Orange in the famous battle of 
Nieuport, the king, smiling, returned, ^^And pray 
tell him from me his son has served as well in the 
warm battle of Leipsic'* 

My father being very much pleased with the 
honour I had received from so great a king, had 
ordered me to acquaint his Majesty that, if he 
pleased to accept of their service, he would raise 
him a regiment of English horse at his own charge 
to be under my command, and to be sent over into 
Holland ; cmd my Lord Craven had orders from the 
King of England to signify his consent to the said 
levy. I acquainted my old friend Sir John Hepburn 
with the contents of the letter in order to have 
his advice, who being pleased with the proposal, 
would have me go to the king immediately with 
the letter, but present service put it off for some 
days. 

The taking of Creutznach was the next service of 
[99] 



Digitized by 



• • . • , 

Google: 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

any moment. The king drew out in person to the 
siege of this town. The town soon came to parley, 
but the castle seemed a work of difficulty, for its 
situation was so strong and so surrounded with 
works behind and above one another, that most 
people thought the king would receive a check from 
it ; but it was not easy to resist the resolution of the 
King of Sweden. 

He never battered it but with two small pieces, 
but having viewed the works himself, ordered a mine 
under the first ravelin, which being sprung with suc- 
cess, he commands a storm. I think there was not 
more commanded men than volunteers, both English, 
Scots, French, and Germans. My old comrade was 
by this time recovered of his wound at Leipsic, and 
made one. The first body of volunteers, of about 
forty, were led on by my Lord Cw^ven, and I led the 
second, among whom were most of the reformade 
Scots officers who took the castle of Oppenheim. 
The first party was not able to make anything of it ; 
the garrison fought with so much fury that many of 
the volunteer gentlemen being wounded, and some 
killed, the rest were beaten ofi* with loss. The king 
was in some passion at his men, and rated them for 
running away, as he called it, though they really re- 
treated in good order, and commanded the assault to 
be renewed. 'Twas our turn to fall on next. Our 
Scots officers, not being used to be beaten, advanced 
immediately, and my Lord Craven with his volun- 
teers, pierced in with us, fighting gallantly in the 
breach with a pike in his hand ; and, to give him 
the honour due to his bravery, he was with the first 
[100] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

on the top of the rampart, and gave his hand to my 
comrade, and lifted him up after him. We helped 
one another up, till at last almost all the volunteers 
had gained the height of the ravelin, and maintained 
it with a great deal of resolution, expecting when 
the commanded men had gained the same height to 
advance upon the enemy ; when one of the enemy'*s 
captains called to my Lord Craven, and told him 
if they might have honourable terms they would 
capitulate, which my lord telling him he would en- 
gage for, the garrison fired no more, and the captain, 
leaping down from tlie next rampart, came with my 
Lord Craven into the camp, where the conditions 
were agreed on, and the castle surrendered. 

After the taking of this town, the king, hearing of 
Tilly'^s approach, and how he had beaten Gustavus 
Horn, the king^s field-marshal, out of Bamberg, began 
to draw his forces together, and leaving the care of 
his conquests in these parts to his chancellor Oxen- 
stiem, prepares to advance towards Bavaria. 

I had taken an opportunity to wait upon his 
Majesty with Sir John Hepburn, and being about to 
introduce the discourse of my father^s letter, the 
king told me he had received a compliment on my 
account in a letter from King Charles. I told him 
his Majesty had by his exceeding generosity bound 
me and all my friends to pay their acknowledgments 
to him, and that I supposed my father had obtained 
such a mention of it from the King of England, as 
gratitude moved him to ; that his Majesty'^s favour 
had been shown in me to a family both willing and 
ready to serve him, that I had received some com- 
[101] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

mands from my father, which, if his Majesty pleased 
to do me the honour to accept of, might put me in a 
condition to acknowledge his Majesty^s goodness in 
a manner more proportioned to the sense I had of 
his favour ; and with that I produced my father^s 
letter, and read that clause in it which related to the 
regiment of horse, which was as follows : — 

'' I read with a great deal of satisfaction the account 
you give of the great and extraordinary conquests of 
the King of Sweden, and with more his Majesty's sin- 
gular favour to you ; I hope you will be careful to value 
and deserve so much honour. I am glad you rather 
chose to serve as a volunteer at your own charge, than 
to take any command, which^ for want of experience, 
you might misbehave in. 

*^ I have obtained of the king that he will particularly 
thank his Majesty of Sweden for the honour he has 
done you, and if his Majesty gives you so much freedom, 
I could be glad you should in the humblest manner 
thank his Majesty in the name of an old broken soldier. 

^Mfyou think yourself officer enough to command 
them, and his Majesty pleased to accept them, I would 
have you offer to raise his Majesty a regiment of horse, 
which, I think, I may near complete in our neighbour- 
hood with some of your old acquaintance, who are very 
willing to see the world. If his Majesty gives you the 
word, they shall receive his commands in the Maes, the 
king having promised me to give them arms, and trans- 
port them for that service into Holland ; and I hope 
they may do his Majesty such service as may be for your 
honour and the advantage of his Majesty's interest and 
glory. 

"Youa Loving FATHKa/' 

[102] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

" T is an offer like a gentleman and like a soldier,'* 
says the king, ^^ and I '11 accept of it on two condi- 
tions : first,'' says the king, " that I will pay your 
father the advance money for the raising the regi- 
ment ; and next, that they shall be landed in the 
Weser or the Elbe ; for which, if the King of Eng- 
land will not, I will pay the passage ; for if they land 
in Holland, it may prove very difficult to get them 
to us when the army shall be marched out of this 
part of the country." 

I returned this answer to my father, and sent my 
man George into England to order that regiment, 
and made him quartermaster. I sent blank commis- 
sions for the officers, signed by the king, to be filled 
up as my father should think fit ; and when I had 
the king's order for the commissions, the secretary 
told me I must go back to the king with them. 
Accordingly I went back to the king, who, opening 
the packet, laid all the commissions but one upon a 
table bcforc him, and bade me take them, and keep- 
ing that one still in his hand, " Now," says he, " you 
are one of my soldiers," and therewith gave me his 
commission, as colonel of horse in present pay. I 
took the commission kneeling, and humbly thanked 
his Majesty. " But," says the king, ** there is one 
article-of-war I expect of you morc than of othens." 
** Your Majesty can expect nothing of me which I 
shall not willingly comply with," said I, " as soon as 
I have the honour to understand what it is." 
** Why, it is," says the king, " that you shall never 
fight but when you have orders, for I shall not be 
willing to lose my colonel before I have the regiment." 
[1031 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

** I shall be ready at all times, sir," returned I, " to 
obey your Majesty's onlers." 

I sent my man express with the king's answer and 
the commission to my father, who had the regiment 
completed in less than two months' time, and six of 
the officers, with a list of the i*est, came away to me, 
whom I presented to his Majesty when he lay before 
Nuremberg, where they kissed his hand« 

One of the captains offered to bring the whole 
regiment travelling as private men into the army 
in six weeks' time, and either to transport their 
equipage, or buy it in Germany, but 'twas thought 
impracticable. However, I had so many come in 
that manner that I had a complete troop always 
about me, and obtained the king's order to muster 
them as a troop. 

On the 8th of March the king decamped, and, 
marching up the river Maine, bent his course directly 
for Bavaria, taking several small places by the way, 
and expecting to engage with Tilly, who he thought 
would dispute his entrance into Bavaria, kept his 
army together ; but Tilly, finding himself too weak 
to encounter him, turned away, and leaving Bavaria 
open to the king, marched into the Upper Palatinate. 
The king finding the country clear of the Imperialists 
comes to Nuremberg, made his entrance into that 
city the 21st of March, and being nobly treated by 
the citizens, he continued his march into Bavaria, 
and on the 26th sat down before Donauwerth. The 
town was taken the next day by storm, so swift were 
the conquests of this invincible captain. Sir John 
Hepburn, with the Scots and the English volunteers 
[104] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

at the head of them, entered the town first, and 
cut all the garrison to pieces, except such as escaped 
over the bridge. 

I had no share in the business of Donauwerth, 
being now among the horse, but I was posted on the 
roads with five troops of horse, where we picked up 
a great many stragglers of the garrison, who we 
made prisoners of war. 

T is observable that this town of Donauwerth is 
a very strong place and well foitified, and yet such 
expedition did the king make, and such resolution 
did he use in his first attacks, that he carried the 
town without putting himself to the trouble of 
formal approaches, ^was generally his way when 
he came before any town with a design to besiege 
it ; he never would encamp at a distance and begin 
his trenches a great way off, but bring his men im- 
mediately within half-musket shot of the place; 
there getting under the best cover he could, he would 
immediately begin his batteries and trcnches before 
their faces ; and if there was any place possibly to 
be attacked, he would fall to stoiming immediately. 
By this resolute way of coming on he carried many 
a town in the first heat of his men, which would 
have held out many days against a more regular 
siege. 

This march of the king broke all Tilly^s measures, 
for now he was obliged to face about, and leaving 
the Upper Palatinate, to come to the assistance of 
the Duke of Bavaria; for the king being S0,000 
strong, besides 10,000 foot and 4000 horse cmd 
dragoons which joined him from the Duringer Wald, 
[105] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

was resolved to ruin the duke, who lay now open to 
him, and was the most powerful and inveterate 
enemy of the Fix&gt;testants in the empire. 

Tilly was now joined with the Duke of Bavaria, 
and might together make about SS,000 men, and in 
order to keep the Swedes out of the country of 
Bavaria, had planted themselves along the banks of 
the river Lech, which runs on the edge of the duke^s 
territories; and having fortified the other side of 
the river, and planted his cannon for several miles at 
all the convenient places on the river, resolved to 
dispute the king^s passage. . 

I shall be the longer in relating this account of 
the Lech, being esteemed in those days as great an 
action as any battle or siege of that age, and par- 
ticularly famous for the disaster of the gallant old 
General Tilly ; and for that I can be more particular 
in it than oUier accounts, having been an eye-witness 
to every part of it. 

The king being truly informed of the disposition 
of the Bavarian army, was once of the mind to have 
left the banks of the Lech, have repassed the Danube, 
and so setting down before Ingolstadt, the duke^s 
capital city, by the taking that strong town to have 
made his entrance into Bavaria, and the conquest 
of such a fortress, one entire action ; but the strength 
of the place, and the difficulty of maintaining his 
leaguer in an enemy's country while Tilly was so 
strong in the field, diverted him from that design ; 
he therefore concluded that Tilly was first to be 
beaten out of the country, and then the siege of 
Ingolstadt would be the easier. 
[106] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Whereupon the king resolved to go and view the 
situation of the enemy. His Majesty went out the 
Snd of April with a strong party of horse, which I 
had the honour to command. We marched as near 
as we could to the banks of the river, not to be too 
much exposed to the enemy'^s cannon, and having 
gained a little height, where the whole course of 
the river might be seen, the king halted, and com- 
manded to draw up. The king alighted, and calling 
me to him, examined every reach and turning of the 
river by his glass, but finding the river run a long 
and almost a straight course he could find no place 
which he liked ; but at last turning himself north, and 
looking down the stream, he found the river, stretch- 
ing a long reach, doubles short upon itself, making a 
round and very narrow point. "There's a point 
will do our business,'* says the king, "and if the 
ground be good I'll pass thei*e, let Tilly do his 
worst." 

He immediately ordered a small party of horse to 
view the ground, and to bring him word particularly 
how high the bank was on each side and at the point. 
" And he shall have fifty dollars," says the king, " that 
will bring me word how deep the water is." I asked 
his Majesty leave to let me go, which he would by no 
means allow of; but as the party was drawing out, a 
sergeant of dragoons told the king, if he pleased to 
let him go disguised as a boor, he would bring him 
an account of eveiything he desired. The king liked 
the motion well enough, and the fellow being very well 
acquainted with the country, puts on a ploughman's 
habit, and went away immediately with a long pole 
[107] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

upon his shoulder. The horse lay all this while in the 
woods, and the king stood undiscemed by the enemy 
on the little hill aforesaid. The dragoon with his 
long pole comes down boldly to the bank of the river, 
and calling to the sentinels which Tilly had placed on 
the other bank, talked with them, asked them if they 
could not help him over the river, and pretended he 
wanted to come to them. At last being come to the 
point where, as I said, the river makes a short turn, 
he stands parleying with them a great while, and 
sometimes, pretending to wade over, he puts his long 
pole into the water, then finding it pretty shallow he 
pulls off his hose and goes in, still ilirusting his pole 
in before him, till being gotten up to his middle, he 
could reach beyond him, where it was too deep, and 
so shaking his head, comes back again. The soldiers 
on the other side, laughing at him, asked him if he 
could swim ? He said, ** No." " Why, you fool you," 
says one of the sentinels, " the channel of the river is 
twenty feet deep." " How do you know that ?" says 
the dragoon. ** VVTiy, our engineer," says he, " meas- 
ured it yesterday." This was what he wanted, but 
not yet folly satisfied, " Ay, but," says he, " maybe 
it may not be very broad, and if one of you would 
wade in to meet me till I could reach you with my 
pole, I 'd give him half a ducat to pull me over." 
The innocent way of his discourse so deluded the sol- 
diers, that one of them immediately strips and goes 
in up to the shoulders, and our dragoon goes in on 
this side to meet him; but the stream took t ''other 
soldier away, and he being a good swimmer, came 
swimming over to this side. The dragoon was then 
[108] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

in a great deal of pain for fear of being discovered, 
and was once going to kill the fellow, and make off; 
but at last resolved to carry on the humour, and 
having entertained the fellow with a tale of a tub, 
about the Swedes stealing his oats, the fellow being 
a-cold wanted to be gone, and he as willing to be rid 
of him, pretended to be very sorry he could not get 
over the river, and so makes off. 

By this, however, he learned both the depth and 
breadth of the channel, the bottom and nature of 
both shores, and everything the king wanted to know. 
We could see him from the hill by our glasses very 
plain, and could see the soldier naked with him. 
Says the king, " he will certainly be discovered and 
knocked on the head from the other side : he is a 
fool,^ says the king, ** he does not kill the fellow and 
run off.'' But when the dragoon told his tale, the 
king was extremely well satisfied with him, gave him 
a hundred dollars, and made him a quartermaster to 
a troop of cuirassiers. 

The king having farther examined the dragoon, 
he gave him a very distinct account of the shore and 
the ground on this side, which he found to be higher 
than the enemy's by ten or twelve foot, and a hard 
gravel. 

Hereupon the king resolves to pass there, and in 
order to it gives, himself, particular directions for 
such a bridge as I believe never army passed a 
river on before nor since. 

His bridge was only loose planks laid upon large 
tressels in the same homely manner as I have seen 
bricklayers raise a low scaffold to build a brick wall ; 
[109] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the tressels were made higher than one another to 
answer to the river as it became deeper or shallower, 
and w&amp;s all framed and fitted before any appearance 
was made of attempting to pass. 

When all was ready the king brings his army down 
to the bank of the river, and plants his cannon as 
the enemy had done, some here and some there, to 
amuse them. 

At night, April 4th, the king commanded about 
2000 men to march to the point, and to throw up 
a trench on either side, and quite round it with a 
battery of six pieces of cannon at each end, besides 
three small mounts, one at the point and one of each 
side, which had each of them two pieces upon them. 
This work was begun so briskly and so well earned 
on, the king firing all the night fi*om the other 
parts of the river, that by daylight all the batteries 
at the new work were mounted, the trench lined 
with SOOO musketeers, and all the utensils of the 
bridge lay ready to be put together. 

Now the Imperialists discovered the design, but it 
was too late to hinder it; the musketeers in the 
great trench, and the five new batteries, made such 
continual fire that the other bank, which, as before, 
lay twelve feet below them, was too hot for the Im- 
perialists ; whereupon Tilly, to be provided for the 
king at his coming over, falls to work in a wood 
right against the point, and raises a great battery 
for twenty pieces of cannon, with a breastwork or 
line, as near the river as he could, to cover his men, 
thinking that when the king had built his bridge he 
might easily beat it down with his cannon. 
. [110] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

But the king had doubly prevented him, first by 
laying his bridge so low that none of Tilly^s shot 
could hurt it ; for the bridge lay not above half a 
foot above the water's edge, by which means the 
king, who in that showed himself an excellent en« 
gineer, had secured it from any batteries to be made 
within the land, and the angle of the bank secured 
it from the remoter batteries on the other side, and 
the continual fire of the cannon and small shot beat 
the Imperialists from their station just against it, 
they having no works to cover them. 

And in the second place, to secure his passage he 
sent over about 200 men, and after that 200 more, 
who had orders to cast up a large ravelin on the other 
bank, just where he designed to land his bridge. 
This was done with such expedition too, that it was 
finished before night, and in condition to receive 
all the shot of Tilly's great battery, and efTectually 
covered his bridge. While this was doing the king 
on his side lays over his bridge. Both sides wrought 
hard all day and all night, as if the spade, not the 
sword, had been to decide the controversy, and that 
he had got the victory whose trenches and batteries 
were first ready. In the meanwhile the cannon and 
musket bullets flew like hail, and made the service 
so hot that both sides had enough to do to make 
their men stand to their work. The king, in the 
hottest of it, animated his men by his presence, and 
Tilly, to give him his due, did the same ; for the execu- 
tion was so great, and so many of&amp;cei*s killed. Gen- 
eral Altringer wounded, and two sergeant-majora 
killed, that at last Tilly himself was obliged to ex- 

[111] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

pose himself, and to come up to the very face of our 
line to encourage his men, and give his necessary 
orders. 

And here about one oVlock, much about the time 
that the king^s brigade and works were finished, and 
just as they said he had ordered to fall on upon our 
ravelin with 3000 foot, was the brave old Tilly slain 
with a musket bullet in the thigh. He was carried off 
to Ingolstcult, and lived some days after, but died of 
that wound the same day as the king had his horse 
shot under him at the siege of that town. 

We made no question of passing the river here, 
having brought everything so forward, and with such 
extraordinary success ; but we should have found it a 
very hot piece of work if Tilly had lived one day 
more, and, if I may give my opinion of it, having 
seen Tilly's battery and breastwork, in the face of 
which we must have passed the river, I must say that, 
whenever we had marched, if Tilly had fallen in with 
his horse and foot, placed in that trench, the whole 
army would have passed as much danger as in the 
face of a strong town in the storming a counterscarp. 
The king himself, when he saw with what judgment 
Tilly had prepared his works, and what danger he 
must have run, would often say that day's success 
was every way equal to the victory of Leipsic 

Tilly being hui*t and carried off, as if the soul of 
the army had been lost, they began to draw off. 
The Duke of Bavaria took horse and rid away as if 
he had fled out of battle for his life. 

The other generals, with a little more caution, as 
well as courage, drew off by degrees, sending their 
[118] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

cannon and baggage away firsts and leaving some to 
continue firing on the bank of the river, to conceal 
their retreat. The river preventing any intelligence, 
we knew nothing of the disaster befallen them ; and 
the king, who looked for blows, having finished his 
bridge and ravelin, ordered to run a line with pali- 
sadoes to take in more ground on the bank of the 
river, to cover the first troops he should send over. 
This being finished the same night, the king sends 
over a party of his guards to relieve the men who 
were in the ravelin, and commanded 600 musketeers 
to man the new line out of the Scots brigade. 

Early in the morning a small party of Scots, com- 
manded by one Captain Forbes, of my Lord Reay's 
regiment, were sent out to learn something of the 
enemy, the king observing they had not fired all 
night ; and while this party were abroad, the army 
stood in battalia ; and my old friend Sir John Hep- 
bum, whom of all men the king most depended upon 
for any desperate service, was ordered to pass the 
bridge with his brigade, and to draw up without the 
line, with command to advance as he found the horse, 
who wei-e to second him, come over. 

Sir John being passed without the trench, meets 
Captain Forbes with some prisoners, and the good 
news of the enemy's retreat He sends him directly 
to the king, who was by this time at the head of his 
army, in full battalia, ready to follow his vanguard, 
expecting a hot day's work of it. Sir John sends 
messenger after messenger to the king, entreating him 
to give him orders to advance ; but the king would 
not suffer him, for he was ever upon his guard, and 
8 [113] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

would not venture a surprise ; so the army continued 
on this side the Lech all day and the next night. 
In the morning the king sent for me, and ordered 
me to draw out 300 horse, and a colonel with 600 
horse, and a colonel with 800 dragoons, and ordered 
us to enter the wood by three ways, but so as to be 
able to relieve one another ; and then ordered Sir 
John Hepburn with his brigade to advance to the 
edge of the wood to secure our retreat, and at the 
same time commanded another brigade of foot 
to pass the bridge, if need were, to second Sir 
John Hepburn, so warily did this prudent general 
proceed. 

We advanced with our horse into the Bavarian 
camp, which we found forsaken. The plunder of it 
was inconsiderable, for the exceeding caution the 
king had used gave them time to carry off all their 
haggage. We followed them thi'ee or four miles, and 
returned to our camp. 

I confess I was most diverted that day with view- 
ing the works which Tilly had cast up, and must own 
again that had he not been taken off we had met with 
as desperate a piece of work as ever was attempted. 
The next day the rest of the cavalry came up to us, 
commanded by Gustavus Horn, and the king and 
the whole army followed. We advanced through 
the heart of Bavaria, took Rain at the first summons, 
and several other small towns, and sat down before 
Augsburg. 

Augsburg, though a Protestant city, had a Popish 
Bavarian garrison in it of above 5000 men, com- 
manded by a Fugger, a great feimily in Bavaria. 
[114] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

The governor had posted several little parties as out- 
scouts at the distance of two miles and a half or three 
miles from the town. The king, at his coming up to 
this town, sends me with my little troop and three 
companies of dragoons to beat in these out-scouts. 
The first party I lighted on was not above sixteen 
men, who had made a small barricado cross the road, 
and stood resolutely upon their guard. I commanded 
the dragoons to alight and open the barricado, which, 
while they resolutely performed, the sixteen men gave 
them two volleys of their muskets, and through the 
enclosures made their retreat to a turnpike about a 
quarter of a mile farther. We passed their first 
traverse, and coming up to the turnpike, I found it 
defended by SOO musketeers. I prepared to attack 
them, sending word to the king how strong the enemy 
was, and desired some foot to be sent me. My dra- 
goons fell on, and though the enemy made a very hot 
fire, had beat them from this post before SOO foot, 
which the king had sent me, had come up. Being 
joined with the foot, I followed the enemy, who re- 
treated fighting, till they came under the cannon of 
a strong redoubt, where they drew up, and I could 
see another body of foot of about 300 join them out 
of the works ; upon which I halted, and considering 
I was in view of the town, and a great way from the 
army, I faced about and began to march off. As we 
marched I found the enemy followed, but kept at a 
distance, as if they only designed to observe me. I 
had not marched far, but I heard a volley of small 
shot, answered by two or three more, which I presently 
apprehended to be at the turnpike, where I had left 
[116] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

a small guard of twenty-six men with a lieutenant. 
Immediately I detached 100 dragoons to relieve my 
men and secure my retreat, following myself as fast 
as the foot could march. The lieutenant sent me 
back word the post was taken by the enemy, and my 
men cut off. Upon this I doubled my pace, and when 
I came up I found it as the lieutenant said ; for the 
post was taken and manned with 300 musketeers and 
three troops of horse. By this time, also, I found 
the party in my rear made up towards me, so that I 
was like to be charged in a narrow place both in 
front and rear. 

I saw there was no remedy but with all my force to 
fall upon that party before me,and so to break through 
before those from the town could come up with me ; 
wherefore, commanding my dragoons to alight, I or- 
dered them to fall on upon the foot. Their horse 
were drawn up in an enclosed field on one side of the 
road, a great ditch securing the other side, so that 
they thought if I charged the foot in front they would 
fall upon my flank, while those behind would charge 
my rear ; and, indeed, had the other come in time, 
they had cut me off. My dragoons made three fair 
charges on their foot, but were received with so much 
resolution and so brisk a fire, that they were beaten 
off, and sixteen men killed. Seeing them so rudely 
handled, and the horse ready to fall in, I relieved 
them with 100 musketeers, and they renewed the 
attack ; at the same time, with my troop of horse, 
flanked on both wings with fifty musketeers, I faced 
their horse, but did not offer to charge them. The 
case grew now desperate, and the enemy behind were 
[116] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

just at my heels with near 600 men. The captain who 
commanded the musketeers who flanked my horse 
came up to me ; says he, ** If we do not force this 
pass all will be lost ; if you will draw out your troop 
and twenty of my foot, and fall in, 111 engage to 
keep off the horse with the rest^ "With all my 
heart," says I. 

Immediately I wheeled off my troop, and a small 
party of the musketeers followed me, and fell in with 
the dragoons and foot, who, seeing the danger too 
as well as I, fought like madmen. The foot at the 
turnpike were not able to hinder our breaking 
through, so we made our way out, killing about 150 
of them, and put the rest into confusion. 

But now was I in as great a difficulty as before 
how to fetch off my brave captain of foot, for they 
charged home upon him. He defended himself with 
extraordinary gallantry, having the benefit of a piece 
of a hedge to cover him, but he lost half his men, 
and was just upon the point of being defeated when 
the king, informed by a soldier that escaped from 
the turnpike, one of twenty-six, had sent a party of 
600 dragoons to bring me off; these came upon the 
spur, and joined with me just as I had broke through 
the turnpike. The enemy's foot rallied behind their 
horse, and by this time their other party was come 
in ; but seeing our relief they drew off together. 

I lost above 100 men in these skirmishes, and 
killed them about 180. We secured the turnpike, 
and placed a company of foot there with 100 dragoons, 
and came back well beaten to the army. The king, 
to prevent such uncertain skirmishes, advanced the 
[117] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

next day in view of the town, and, according to his 
custom, sits down with his whole anny witliin cannon- 
shot of their walls. 

The king won this great city by force of words, 
for by two or three messages and letters to and 
from the citizens, the town was gained, the garrison 
not daring to defend them against their wills. His 
Majesty made his public entrance into the city on 
the 14th of April, and receiving the compliments of 
the citizens, advanced immediately to Ingolstadt, 
which is accounted, and really is, the strongest town 
in all these parts. 

The town had a very strong garrison in it, and 
the Duke of Bavaria lay entrenched with his army 
under the walls of it, on the other side of the river. 
The king, who never loved long sieges, having viewed 
the town, and brought his^ army within musket-shot 
of it, called a council of war, where it was the king^s 
opinion, in short, that the town would lose him more 
than ^t was worth, and therefore he resolved to raise 
his siege. 

Here the [king going to view the town had his 
horse shot with a cannon-bullet from the works, which 
tumbled the king and his horse over one another, 
that everybody thought he had been killed ; but he 
received no hurt at aU. That very minute, as near 
as could be learnt. General Tilly died in the town 
of the shot he received on the bank of the Lech, as 
aforesaid. 

I was not in the camp when the king was hurt, for 
the king had sent almost all the horse and dragoons, 
under Gustavus Horn, to face the Duke of Bavarians 
[118] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

campy and after that to plunder the country ; which 
truly was a work the soldiers were very glad of, for it 
was very seldom they had that liberty given them, and 
they made very good use of it when it was, for the 
country of Bavaria was rich and plentiful, having 
seen no enemy before during the whole war. 

The army having left the siege of Ingolstadt, pro- 
ceeds to take in the rest of Bavaria. Sir John 
Hepburn, with three brigades of foot, and Gustavus 
Horn, with 3000 horse and dragoons, went to the 
Landshut, and took it the same day. The garrison 
was all horse, and gave us several camisadoes at our 
approach, in one of which I lost two of my troops, 
but when we had beat them into close quarters they 
presently capitulated. The general got a great sum 
of money of the town, besides a great many presents 
to the officers. And from thence the king went on 
to Munich, the Duke of Bavaria's court. Some of 
the general officers would fain have had the plunder- 
ing of the duke's palace, but the king was too gener- 
ous. The city paid him 400,000 dollars ; and the 
duke's magazine was there seized, in which was 140 
pieces of cannon, and small arms for above 20,000 
men. The great chamber of the duke's rarities was 
preserved, by the king's special order, with a great 
deal of care. I expected to have stayed here some 
time, and to have taken a very exact account of 
this curious laboratory ; but being commanded away, 
I had no time, and the fate of the war never gave 
me opportunity to see it again. 

The Imperialists, under the command of Com- 
missary Osta, had besieged Biberach, an Imperial 
[119] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

city not very well fortified; and the inhabitants 
being under the Swedes' protection, defended them- 
selves as well as they could, but were in great danger, 
and sent several expresses to the king for help. 

The king immediately detaches a strong body of 
horse and foot to relieve Biberach, and would be the 
commander himself. I marched among the horse, 
but the Imperialists saved us the labour; for the 
news of the king's coming frighted away Osta, that 
he left Biberach, and hardly looked behind him 
till he got up to the Bodensee, on the confines of 
Switzerland. 

At our return from this expedition the king had 
the first news of Wallenstein's approach, who, on the 
death of Count Tilly, being declared generalissimo 
of the emperor's forces, had played the tyrant in 
Bohemia, and was now advancing with 60,000 men, 
as they reported, to relieve the Duke of Bavaria. 

The king, therefore, in order to be in a posture to 
receive this great general, resolves to quit Bavaria, 
and to expect him on the frontiers of Franconia. 
And because he knew the Nurembergers for their 
kindness to him would be the first sacrifice, he re- 
solved to defend that city against him whatever it 
cost. 

Nevertheless he did not leave Bavaria without a 
defence ; but, on the one hand, he left Sir John Baner 
with 10,000 men about Augsburg, and the Duke 
of Saxe- Weimar with another like army about Ulm 
and Meningen, with orders so to direct their march 
as that they might join him upon any occasion in a 
few days. 

[120] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

We encamped about Nuremberg the middle of 
June. The army, after so many detachments, was 
not above 19,000 men. The Imperial army, joined 
with the Bavarian, were not so numerous as was re- 
ported, but were really 60,000 men. The king, riot 
strong enough to fight, yet, as he used to say, was 
strong enough not to be forced to fight, formed his 
camp so under the cannon of Nuremberg that there 
was no besieging the town but they must besiege 
him too ; and he fortified his camp in so formidable 
a manner that Wallenstein never durst attack him. 
On the 30th of June Wallenstein^s troops appeared, 
and on the 5th of July encamped close by the king, 
and posted themselves not on the Bavarian side, but 
between the king and his own friends of Schwaben 
and Frankenland, in order to intercept his provisions, 
and, as they thought, to starve him out of his camp. 

Here they lay to see, as it were, who could subsist 
longest. The king was strong in horse, for we heul 
full 8000 horse and dragoons in the army, and this 
gave us great advantage in the several skirmishes we 
had with the enemy. The enemy had possession of 
the whole country, and had taken effectual care to 
furnish their army with provisions ; they placed their 
guards in such excellent order, to secure their con- 
voys, that their waggons went from stage to stage as 
quiet as in a time of peace, and were relieved every 
five miles by parties constantly posted on the road. 
And thus the Imperial geneml sat down by us, not 
doubting but he should force the king either to fight 
his way through on very disadvantageous terms, or to 
rise for want of provisions, and leave the city of 
[121 J 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Nuremberg a prey to his army ; for he had vowed 
the destruction of the city, and to make it a second 
Magdeburg. 

But the king, who was not to be easily deceived, 
had countermined all Wallenstein^s designs. He had 
passed his honour to the Nurembergers that he would 
not leave them, and they had undertaken to victual 
his army, and secure him from want, which they did 
so effectually, that he had no occasion to expose his 
troops to any hazard or fatigues for convoys or forage 
on any account whatever. 

The city of Nuremberg is a very rich and populous 
city, and the king being very sensible of their danger, 
had given his word for their defence. And when 
they, being terrified at the threats of the Imperialists, 
sent their deputies to beseech the king to take care 
of them, he sent them word he would, and be besieged 
with them. They, on the other hand, laid in such 
stores of all sorts of provision, both for men and 
horse, that had Wallenstein lain before it six months 
longer, there would have been no scarcity. Every 
private house was a magazine, the camp was plenti- 
fully supplied with all manner of provisions, and the 
market always full, and as cheap as in times of peace. 
The magistrates were so caref\il, and preserved so 
excellent an order in the disposal of all sorts of pro- 
vision, that no engrossing of com could be practised, 
for the prices were every day directed at the town- 
house; and if any man offered to demand more 
money for com than the stated price, he could not 
sell, because at the town store-house you might buy 
cheaper. Hera are two instances of good and bad 

[m] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

conduct : the city of Magdeburg had been entreated 
by the king to settle funds, and raise money for their 
provision and security, and to have a sufRcient garri- 
son to defend them, but they made difRculties, either 
to raise men for themselves, or to admit the king'^s 
troops to assist them, for fear of the charge of 
mliintaining them; and this was the cause of the 
city's ruin. 

The city of Nuremberg opened their arms to 
receive the assistance proffered by the Swedes, and 
their purses to defend their town and common cause ; 
and this was the saving them absolutely from de- 
struction. The rich burghers and magistrates kept 
open ^houses, where the officers of the army were 
always welcome ; and the council of the city took 
such care of the poor that thei*e was no complaining 
nor disorders in the whole city. There is no doubt 
but it cost the city a great deal of money ; but I 
never saw a public charge borne with so much cheer- 
fulness, nor managed with so much prudence and 
conduct in my life. The city fed above 50,000 
mouths every day, including their own poor, besides 
themselves ; and yet when the king had lain thus 
three months, and finding his armies longer in coming 
up than he expected, asked the burgrave how their 
magazines held out, he answered, they desired his 
Majesty not to hasten things for them, for they 
could maintain themselves and him twelve months 
longer if there was occasion. This plenty kept both 
the army and city in good health, as well as in good 
heart; whereas nothing was to be had of us but 
blows, for we fetched nothing from without our 
[123] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

works, nor had no business without the line but to 
interrupt the enemy. 

The manner of the king^s encampment deserves a 
particular chapter. He was a complete surveyor 
and a master in fortification, not to be outdone by 
anybody. He had posted his army in the suburbs 
of the town, and drawn lines round the whole cir- 
cumfei^ence, so that he begirt the whole city with 
his army. His works were large, the ditch deep, 
flanked with innumerable bastions, ravelins, horn- 
works, forts, redoubts, batteries, and palisadoes, the 
incessant work of 8000 men for about fourteen days ; 
besides that, the king was adding something or other 
to it every day, and the very posture of his camp 
was enough to tell a bigger army than Wallenstein's 
that he was not to be assaulted in his trenches. 

The king^s design appeared chiefly to be the pres- 
ervation of the city ; but that was not all. He had 
three armies acting abroad in three several places. 
Gustavus Horn was on the Moselle, the chancellor 
Oxenstiem about Mentz, Cologne, and the Rhine, 
Duke William and Duke Bemhard, together with 
Greneral Baner, in Bavaria. And though he designed 
they should all join him, and had wrote to them all 
to that purpose, yet he did not hasten them, know- 
ing that while he kept the main army at bay about 
Nuremberg, they would, without opposition, re- 
duce those several countries they were acting in 
to his power. This occasioned his lying longer 
in the camp at Nuremberg than he would have done, 
and this occasioned his giving the Imperialists so 
many alarms by his strong parties of horse, of which 
[184] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

he was well provided, that they might not be able 
to make any considerable detachments for the relief 
of their friends. And here he showed his master- 
ship in the war, for by this means his conquests went 
on as effectually as if he had been abroad himself. 

In the meantime it was not to be expected two 
such armies should lie long so near without some 
action. The Imperial army, being masters of the 
field, laid the country for twenty miles round Nu- 
remberg in a manner desolate. What the inhabitants 
could carry away had been before secured in such 
strong towns as had garrisons to protect them, and 
what was left the hungry Crabats devoured or set on 
fire ; but sometimes they were met with by our men, 
who often paid them home for it There had passed 
several small rencounters between our parties and 
theirs ; and as it falls out in such cases, sometimes 
one side, sometimes the other, got the better. But 
I have observed there never was any party sent out 
by the king^s special appointment but always came 
home with victory. 

The first considerable attempt, as I remember, 
was made on a convoy of ammunition. The party 
sent out was commanded by a Saxon colonel, and 
consisted of 1000 horse and 500 dragoons, who burnt 
above 600 waggons loaded with ammunition and 
stores for the army, besides taking about 2000 
muskets, which they brought back to the army. 

The latter end of July the king received advice 

that the Imperialists had formed a magazine for 

provision at a town called Freynstat, twenty miles 

from Nuremberg. Hither all the booty and con- 

[136] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

tributions raised in the Upper Palatinate, and parts 
adjacent, was brought and laid up as in a place of 
security, a garrison of 600 men being placed to 
defend it ; and when a quantity of provisions was 
got together, convoys were appointed to fetch it off. 

The king was resolved, if possible, to take or de- 
stroy this magazine ; and sending for Colonel Dubalt, 
a Swede, and a man of extraordinary conduct, he 
tells him his design, and withal that he must be the 
man to put it in execution, and ordered him to take 
what forces he thought convenient. The colonel, 
who knew the town very well, and the country about 
it, told his Majesty he would attempt it with all his 
heart ; but he was afraid ''t would require some foot 
to make the attack. ** But we can^t stay for that,** 
says the king ; '^ you must then take some dragoons 
with you ; ^ and immediately the king called for me. 
I was just coming up the stairs as the king^s page 
was come out to inquire for me, so I went imme- 
diately in to the king. '* Here ^s a piece of hot work 
for you,^ says the king, ^* Dubalt will tell it you ; 
go together and contrive it.^ 

We immediately withdrew, and the colonel told 
me the design, and what the king and he had dis- 
coursed ; that, in his opinion, foot would be wanted : 
but the king had declared there was no time for the 
foot to march, and had proposed dragoons. I told 
him, I thought dragoons might do as well ; so we 
agreed to take 1600 horse and 400 dragoons. The 
king, impatient in his design, came into the room 
to us to know what we had resolved on, approved 
our measures, gave us orders immediately ; and, turn- 
[186] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

ing to me, ** You shall command the dragoons,^ says 
the king, ^ but Dubalt must be general in this case, 
for he knows the country." ** Your Majesty ,** said 
I, " shall be always served by me in any figure you 
please." The king wished us good speed, and hur- 
ried us away the same afternoon, in order to come 
to the place in time. We marched slowly on because 
of the carriages we had with us, and came to Freyn- 
stat about one o^dock in the night perfectly undis- 
covered. The guaixls were so negligent, that we came 
to the very port before they had notice of us, and 
a sergeant with twelve dragoons thrust in upon the 
out-sentinels, and killed them without noise. 

Immediately ladders were placed to the half- 
moon which defended the gate, which the dragoons 
mounted and earned in a trice, about twenty-eight 
men being cut in pieces within. As soon as the 
ravelin was taken, they burst open the gate, at which 
I entered at the head of 200 dragoons, and seized the 
drawbridge. By this time the town was in alarm, 
and the drums beat to arms, but it was too late, 
for by the help of a petard we broke open the gate, 
and entered the town. The garrison made an ob- 
stinate fight for about half-an-hour, but our men 
being all in, and three troops of horse dismounted 
coming to our assistance with their carabines, the 
town was entirely mastered by three of the clock, 
and guards set to prevent anybody running to give 
notice to the enemy. There were about 200 of the 
garrison killed, and the rest taken prisoners. The 
town being thus secured, the gates were opened, 
and Colonel Dubalt came in with the horse. 
[127] . 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

The guaixls being set, we entered the magazine, 
where we found an incredible quantity of all sorts 
of provision. There was 150 tons of bread, 8000 
sacks of meal, 4000 sacks of oats, and of other pro- 
visions in proportion. We caused as much of it as 
could be loaded to be brought away in such wag- 
gons and carriages as we found, and set the rest 
on fire, town and all. We stayed by it till we saw 
it past a possibility of being saved, and then drew 
off with 800 waggons, which we found in the place, 
most of which we loaded with bread, meal, and oats. 
While we were doing this we sent a party of dragoons 
into the fields, who met us again as we came out, 
with above 1000 head of black cattle, besides sheep. 

Our next care was to bring this booty home with- 
out meeting with the enemy, to secure which, the 
colonel immediately despatched an express to the 
king, to let him know of our success, and to desire 
a detachment might be made to secure our retreat, 
being charged with so much plunder. 

And it was no more than need ; for though we 
had used all the diligence possible to prevent any 
notice, yet somebody, more forward than ordinary, 
had escaped away, and carried the news of it to the 
Imperial army. The general, upon tliis bad news, 
detaches Major-General Sparr with a body of 6000 
men to cut off our retreat. The king, who had 
notice of this detachment, marches out in person 
with SOOO men to wait upon General Sparr. All 
this was the account of one day. The king met 
General Sparr at the moment when his troops were 
divided, fell upon them, routed one part of them, 
[128] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

and the rest in a few hours after, killed them 1000 
men, and took the general prisoner. 

In the interval of this action we came safe to the 
camp with our booty, which was very considerable, 
and would have supplied our whole army for a 
month. Thus we feasted at the enemy'^s cost, and 
beat them into the bargain. 

The king gave all the live cattle to the Niu«m- 
bergers, who, though they had really no want of pro- 
visions, yet fresh meat was not so plentiful as such 
provisions which were stored up in vessels and laid by. 

After this skirmish we had the country more at 
command than before, and daily fetched in fresh 
provisions and forage in the fields. 

The two armies had now lain a long time in sight 
of one another, and daily skirmishes had considerably 
weakened them ; and the king, beginning to be im- 
patient, hastened the advancement of his friends to 
join him, in which also they were not backward ; 
but having drawn together their forces from several 
parts, and ell joined the chancellor Oxenstiem, news 
came, the 16th of August, that they were in full 
march to join us ; and being come to a small town 
caUed Brock, the king went out of the camp with 
about 1000 horse to view them. I went along with 
the horse, and the 21st of August saw the review of 
all the armies together, which were 30,000 men, in 
extraordinary equipage, old soldiers, and commanded 
by officers of the greatest conduct and experience in 
the world. There was the rich chancellor of Sweden, 
who commanded as general ; Gustavus Horn and 
John Baner, both Swedes and old generals ; Duke 
9 [ 129 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

William and Duke Bernhard of Weimar ; the Land- 
grave of Hesse-Cassel, the Palatine of Birkenfelt, and 
abundance of princes and lords of the empire. 

The armies being joined, the king, who was now 
a match for Wallenstein, quits his camp and draws 
up in battalia before the Imperial trenches : but the 
scene was changed. Wallenstein was no moi*e able 
to fight now than the king was before ; but, keeping 
within his trenches, stood upon his guard. The 
king coming up close to his works, plants batteries, 
and cannonaded him in his very camp. The Impe- 
rialists, finding the king press upon them, retreat 
into a woody country about three leagues, and, tak- 
ing possession of an old ruined castle, posted their 
army behind it. 

This old castle they fortified, and placed a very 
strong guard there. The king, having viewed the 
place, though it was a very strong post, resolved to 
attack it with the whole right wing. The attack was 
made with a great deal of order and resolution, the 
king leading the first party on with sword in hand, 
and the fight was maintained on both sides with the 
utmost gallantry and obstinacy all the day and the 
next night too, for the cannon and musket never 
gave over till the morning; but the Imperialists 
having the advantage of the hill, of their works and 
batteries, and being continually relieved, and the 
Swedes naked, without cannon or works, the post 
was maintained, and the king, finding it would cost 
him too much blood, drew off in the morning. 

This was the famous fight at Altenberg, where 
the Imperialists boasted to have shown the world the 
[180] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

King of Sweden was not invincible. They call it the 
victory at Altenberg ; ^t is true the king failed in his 
attempt of carrying their works, but there was so 
little of a victory in it, that the Imperial general 
thought fit not to venture a second brush, but to 
draw off their army as soon as they could to a safer 
quarter. 

I had no share in this attack, very few of the horse 
being in the action, but my comrade, who was always 
among the Scots volunteers, was wounded and taken 
prisoner by the enemy. They used him very civilly, 
and the king and Wallenstein straining courtesies 
with one another, the king released Major-Greneral 
Sparr without ransom, and the Imperial general sent 
home Colonel Tortenson, a Swede, and sixteen volun- 
teer gentlemen, who were taken in the heat of the 
action, among whom my captain was one. 

The king lay fourteen days facing the Imperial 
army, and using all the stratagems possible to bring 
them to a battle, but to no purpose, during which 
time we had parties continually out, and very often 
skirmishes with the enemy. 

I had a command of one of these parties in an ad- 
venture, wherein I got no booty, nor much honour. 
The king had received advice of a convoy of provisions 
which was to come to the enemy^s camp from the 
Upper Palatinate, atid having a great mind to sur- 
prise them, he commanded us to waylay them with 
1200 horse, and 800 dragoons. I had exact directions 
given me of the way they were to come, and posting 
my horse in a village a little out of the road, I lay 
with my dragoons in a wood, by which they were to 
[131] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

pass by break of day. The enemy appeared with theur 
convoy, and being very wary, their out-scouts dis- 
covered us in the wood, and fired upon the sentinel 
I had posted in a tree at the entrance of the wood. 
Finding myself discovered, I would have retreated 
to the village where my horse were posted, but in a 
moment the wood was skirted with the enemy^s horse, 
and 1000 commanded musketeers advanced to beat 
me out. In this pickle I sent away three messengers 
one after another for the horse, who were within two 
miles of me, to advance to my relief; but all my mes- 
sengers fell into the enemy'^s hands. Four hundred 
of my dragoons on foot, whom I had placed at a little 
distance before me, stood to their work, and beat off 
two charges of the enemy'^s foot vrith some loss on 
both sides. Meantime 200 of my men faced about, 
and rushing out of the wood, broke through a party 
of the enemy^s horse, who stood to watch our com- 
ing out. I confess I was exceedingly surprised at it, 
thinking those fellows had done it to make their escape, 
or else were gone over to the enemy ; and my men were 
so discouraged at it, that they b^an to look about 
which way to run to save themselves, and were just 
upon the point of disbanding to shift for themselves, 
when one of the captains called to me aloud to beat 
a parley and treat. I made no answer, but, as if I 
had not heard him, immediately gave the word for 
all the captains to come together. The consultation 
was but short, for the musketeers were advancing to 
a third charge, with numbers which we were not likely 
to deal with. In short, we resolved to beat a parley, 
and demand quarter, for that was all we could expect, 
[182] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

when on a sudden the body of horse I had posted in 
the village, being directed by the noise, had advanced 
to relieve me, if they saw occasion, and had met the 
200 dragoons, who guided them directly to the spot 
where they had broke through, and all together fell 
upon the horse of the enemy, who were posted on 
that side, and, mastering them before they could be 
relieved, cut them all to pieces and brought me off! 
Under the shelter of this party, we made good our 
retreat to the village, but we lost above 300 men, 
and were glad to make off from the village too, for 
the enemy were very much too strong for us* 

Returning thence towards the camp, we fell foul 
with 200 Crabats, who had been upon the plundering 
account. We made ourselves some amends upon them 
for our former loss, for we showed them no mercy ; 
but our misfortunes were not ended, for we had but 
just despatched those Crabats when we fell in with 
8000 Imperial horse, who, on the expectation of the 
aforesaid convoy were sent out to secure them. 

All I could do could not persuade my men to 
stand their ground against this party ; so that find- 
ing they would run away in confusion, I agreed to 
make off, and facing to the right, we went over a 
large common a full trot, till at last fear, which 
always increases in a flight, brought us to a plain 
flight, the enemy at our heels. I must confess I 
was never so mortified in my life; 'twas to no 
purpose to turn head, no man would stand by us ; 
we run for life, and a great many we left by the 
way who were either wounded by the enemy'^s shot, 
or else could not keep race with us. 
[183] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

At last, having got over the common, which was 
near two miles, we came to a lane ; one of our cap- 
tains, a Saxon by country, and a gentleman of a good 
fortune, alighted at the entrance of the lane, and 
with a bold heart faced about, shot his own horse, 
and called his men to stand by him and defend the 
lane. Some of his men halted, and we rallied about 
600 men, which we posted as well as we could, to 
defend the pass ; but the enemy charged us with 
great fiiry. The Saxon gentleman, after defending 
himself with exceeding gaUantry, and refusing quar- 
ter, was killed upon the spot. A German dragoon, 
as I thought him, gave me a rude blow with the 
stock of his piece on the side of my head, and was 
just going to repeat it, when one of my men shot 
him dead. I was so stunned with the blow, that I 
knew nothing ; but recovering, I found myself in the 
hands of two of the enemy'^s officers, who offered me 
quarter, which I accepted ; and indeed, to give them 
tiieir due, they used me very civilly. Thus this 
whole party was defeated, and not above 500 men 
got safe to the army ; nor had half the number 
escaped, had not the Saxon captain made so bold a 
stand at the head of the lane. 

Several other parties of the king^s army revenged 
our quarrel, and paid them home for it ; but I had 
a particular loss in this defeat, that I never saw the 
king after ; for though his Majesty sent a trumpet 
to reclaim us as prisoners the very next day, yet I 
was not delivered, some scruple happening about 
exchanging, till after the battle of Liitzen, where 
that gallant prince lost his life. 
[184] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

The Jmperial army rose from their camp about 
eight or ten days after the king had removed, and I 
was carried prisoner in the army till they sat down 
to the siege of Coburg Castle, and then was left with 
other prisoners of war, in the custody of Colonel 
Spezuter, in a small castle near the camp called 
Neustadt. Here we continued indifferent well 
treated, but could learn nothing of what action the 
armies were upon, till the Duke of Friedland, having 
been beaten oft' from the castle of Coburg, marched 
into Saxony, and the prisoners were sent for into the 
camp, as was said, in order to be exchanged. 

I came into the Imperial leaguer at the siege of 
Leipsic, and within three days after my coming, the 
city was surrendered, and I got liberty to lodge at 
my old quaiters in the town upon my parole. 

The King of Sweden was at the heels of the- 
Imperialists, for finding Wallenstein resolved to ruin 
the Elector of Saxony, the king had re-collected as 
much of his divided army as he could, and carae 
upon him just as he was going to besiege Torgau. 

As it is not my design to write a history of any 
more of these wars than I was actually concerned in, 
so I shall only note that, upon the king^s approach, 
Wallenstein halted, and likewise called ell his troops 
together, for he apprehended the king would fall on 
him, and we that were prisoners fancied the Imperial 
soldiers went unwillingly out, for the very name of 
the King of Sweden was become terrible to them. 
In short, they drew all the soldiers of the garrison 
they could spare out of Leipsic ; sent for Pappenheim 
again, who was gone but three days before with 6000 
[135] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

men on a private expedition. On the 16th of Novem- 
ber, the armies met on the plains of Liitzen ; a long 
and bloody battle was fought, the Imperialists were 
entirely routed and beaten, 1S,000 slain upon the 
spot, their cannon, baggage, and SOOO prisoners 
taken, but the King of Sweden lost his life, being 
killed at the head of his troops in the beginning of 
the fight 

It is impossible to describe the consternation the 
death of this conquering king struck into all the 
princes of Grermany; the grief for him exceeded 
all manner of human sorrow. All people looked 
upon themselves as ruined and swallowed up; the 
inhabitants of two-thirds of all Germany put them- 
selves into mourning for him ; when the ministers 
mentioned him in their sermons or prayers, whole 
congi*egations would burst out into tears. The 
Elector of Saxony was utterly inconsolable, and 
would for several days walk about his palace like a 
distracted man, crying the saviour of Germany was 
lost, the refuge of abused princes was gone, the soul 
of the war was dead ; and from that hour was so 
hopeless of out-living the war, that he sought to 
make peace with the emperor. 

Three days after this mournful victory, the Saxons 
recovered the town of Leipsic by stratagem. The 
Duke of Saxony'^s forces lay at Torgau, and perceiv- 
ing the confusion the Imperialists were in at the 
news of the overthrow of their army, they resolved 
to attempt the recovery of the town. They sent 
about twenty scattering troopers, who, pretending 
themselves to be Imperialists fled from the battle, 
[186] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

were let in one by one, and still as they came in, they 
stayed at the court of guard in the port, entertaining 
the soldiers with discourse about the fight, and how 
they escaped, and the like, till the whole number 
being got in, at a watchword they fell on the guard, 
and cut them all in pieces ; and immediately opening 
the gate to three troops of Saxon horse, the town 
was taken in a moment. 

It was a welcome surprise to me, for I was at 
liberty of course ; and the war being now on another 
foot, as I thought, and the king dead, I resolved to 
quit the service. 

I had sent my man, as I have already noted, into 
England, in order to bring over the troops my father 
had raised for the King of Sweden. He executed 
his commission so well, that he landed with five 
troops at Erabden in very good condition; and 
orders were sent them by the king, to join the Duke 
of Lunenberg^s army, which they did at the siege of 
Boxtude, in the Lower Saxony. Here by long and 
very sharp service they were most of them cut off, 
and though they were several times recniited, yet I 
understood there were not three full troops left. 

The Duke of Saxe -Weimar, a gentleman of great 
courage, had the command of tiie army after the 
king^s death, and managed it with so much prudence, 
that all things were in as much order as could be 
expected, after so great a loss ; for the Imperialists 
were everywhere beaten, and Wallenstein never made 
any advantage of the king^s death. 

I waited on him at Heilbronn, whither he was gone 
to meet the great chancellor of Sweden, where I paid 
[187] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

him my respects, and desired he would bestow the 
remainder of my regiment on my comrade the cap- 
tain, which he did with all the civility and I'eadiness 
imaginable. So I took my leave of him, and prepared 
to come for England. 

I shall only note this, that at this Diet, the Prot- 
estant princes of the empire renewed tlieir league 
with one another, and with the crown of Sweden, 
and came to several regulations and conclusions for 
the carrying on the war, which they afterwards 
prosecuted, under the direction of the said chancellor 
of Sweden. But it was not the work of a small 
difBculty nor of a short time. And having been 
persuaded to continue almost two years afterwards 
at Frankfort, Heilbronn, and thereabout, by the 
particular friendship of that noble wise man, and 
extraordinary statesman, Axell Oxenstieni, chancellor 
of Sweden, I had opportunity to be concerned in, 
and present at, several treaties of extraordinary 
consequence, sufBcient for a history, if that were my 
design. 

Particularly I had the happiness to be present at, 
and have some concern in, the treaty for the restoring 
the posterity of the truly noble Palsgiave, King of 
Bohemia. King James of England had indeed too 
much neglected the whole family ; and I may say with 
authority enough, from my own knowledge of affairs, 
had nothing been done for them but what was from 
England, that family had remained desolate and 
forsaken to this day. 

But that glorious king, whom I can never mention 
without some remark of his extraordinary merit, had 
[188] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

left particular instructions with his chancellor to 
i*escue the Palatinate to its rightful lord, as a proof 
of his design to restore the liberty of Germany, and 
reinstate the oppressed princes who were subjected to 
the tyranny of the house of Austria. 

Pursuant to this resolution, the chancellor pro- 
ceeded very much like a man of honour; and though 
the King of Bohemia was dead a little before, yet he 
carefully managed the treaty, answered the objections 
of several princes, who, in the general ruin of the 
family, had reaped private advantages, settled the 
capitulations for the quota of contributions very 
much for their advantage, and fully reinstalled the 
Prince Charles in the possession of all his dominions 
in the Lower Palatinate, which afterwards was con- 
firmed to him and his posterity by the peace of West- 
phalia, where all these bloody wars were finished in a 
peace, which has since been the foundation of the 
Protestants^ liberty, and the best security of the whole 
empire. 

I spent two years rather in wandering up and 
down than travelling; for though I had no mind 
to serve, yet I could not find in my heart to leave 
Germany; and I had obtained some so very close 
intimacies with the general officers that I was often 
in the army, and sometimes they did me the honour 
to bring me into their councils of war. 

Particularly, at that eminent council before the 
battle of Nordlingen, I was invited to the council of 
war, both by Duke Bemhard of Weimar and by Gus- 
tavus Horn. They were generals of equal worth, 
and their courage and experience had been so well, 
[139] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

and so often tried, that more than ordinary regard 
was always given to what they said. Duke Bemhard 
was indeed the younger man, and Gustavus had 
served longer under our great schoolmaster the king ; 
but it was hard to judge which was the better gen* 
eral, since both had experience enough, and shown 
undeniable proo&amp; both of their bravery and conduct. 

I am obliged, in the course of my relation, so 
often to mention the great respect I often received 
from these great men, that it makes me sometimes jeal* 
ous, lest the reader may think I affect it as a vanity. 
The truth is, and I am ready to confess, the honours 
I received, upon all occasions, from persons of such 
worth, and who had such an eminent share in the 
greatest action of that age, very much pleased me, 
and particularly, as they gave me occasions to 
see everything that was doing on the whole stage 
of the war. For being under no command, but at 
liberty to rove about, I could come to no Swedish gar- 
rison or party, but, sending my name to the com- 
manding officer, I could have the word sent me ; and 
if I came into the army, I was often treated as I was 
now at this famous battle of Nordlingen. 

But I cannot but say, that I always looked upon 
this particular respect to be the effect of more than 
ordinary regard the great king of Sweden always 
showed me, rather than any merit of my own ; and 
the veneration they all had for his memory, made 
them continue to show me all the marks of a suitable 
esteem. 

But to return to the council of war, the great 
and, indeed, the only question before us was, Shall 
[140] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

we give battle to the Imperialists, or not? Gus* 
tavus Horn was against it, and gave, as I thought, 
the most invincible arguments against a battle that 
reason could imagine. 

First, they were weaker than the enemy by above 
5000 men. 

Secondly, the Cardinal-Infant of Spain, who was 
in the Imperial army with 8000 men, was but there 
en passantj being going from Italy to Flanders, to 
take upon him the government of the Low Coun- 
tries ; and if he saw no prospect of immediate 
action, would be gone in a few days. 

Thirdly, they had two reinforcements, one of 
5000 men, under the command of Colonel Cratz, 
and one of 7000 men, under the Rhinegrave, who 
were just at hand — the last within three days' 
march of them : and. 

Lastly, they had already saved their honour, in 
that they had put 600 foot into the town of Nord- 
lingcn, in the face of the enemy'^s army, and con- 
sequently the town might hold out some days the 
longer. 

Fate, rather than reason, certainly blinded the 
rest of the generals against such arguments as these. 
Duke Bemhard and almost all the generals were for 
fighting, alleging the affront it would be to the 
Swedish reputation to see their friends in the town 
lost before their faces. 

Gustavus Horn stood stiff to his cautious advice, 

and was against it, and I thought the Baron D'Off- 

kirk treated him a little indecently ; for, being very 

warm in the matter, he told them, that if Gustavus 

[141] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Adolphus had been governed by such cowardly 
counsel, he had never been conqueror of half Ger- 
many in two years. "No,** replied old General 
Horn, very smartly, ^^ but he had been now alive to 
have testified for me, that I was never taken by him 
for a coward ; and yet," says he, " the king was never 
for a victory with a hazard, when he could have it 
without" 

I was asked my opinion, which I would have de- 
clined, being in no commission ; but they pressed me 
to speak. I told them I was for staying at least till 
the Rhinegrave came up, who, at least, might, if ex- 
presses were sent to hasten him, be up with us in 
twenty-four hours. But OfTkirk could not hold his 
passion, and had not he been overruled he would have 
almost quarrelled with Marshal Horn. Upon which 
the old general, not to foment him, with a great deal 
of mildness stood up, and spoke thus — 

** Come, OfTkirk," says he, " 1 11 submit my opinion 
to you, and the majority of our fellow-soldiers. 
We will fight, but, upon my word, we shall have 
our hands full." 

The resolution thus taken, they attacked the Im- 
perial army. I must confess the counsels of this day 
seemed as confused as the resolutions of the night. 

Duke Bemliard was to lead the van of the left 
wing, and to post himself upon a hill which was on 
the enemy's right without their entrenchments, so 
that, having secured that post, they might level their 
cannon upon the foot, who stood behind the lines, 
and relieved the town at pleasure. He marched ac- 
cordingly by break of day, and falling with great fury 
[142] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

upon eight regiments of foot, which were posted at 
the foot of the hill, he presently routed them, and 
made himself master of the post Flushed with this 
success, he never ^"egards his own concerted measures 
of stopping there and possessing what he had got, 
but pushes on and falls in with the main body of the 
enemy's army. 

While this was doing, Gustavus Horn attacks an- 
other post on the hill, where the Spaniards had posted 
and lodged themselves behind some works they had 
cast up on the side of the hill. Here they defended 
themselves with extreme obstinacy for five hours, and 
at last obliged the Swedes to give it over with loss* 
This extraordinary gallantry of the Spaniards was the 
saving of the Imperial army; for Duke Bernhard 
having all this while resisted the frequent charges o^ 
the Imperialists, and borne the weight of two-thirds 
of their army, was not able to stand any longer, but 
sending one messenger on the neck of another to 
Gustavus Horn for more foot, he, finding he could 
not carry his point, had given it over, and was in full 
march to second the duke. But now it was too late, 
for the King of Hungary seeing the duke's men, as it 
were, wavering, and having notice of Horn's wheeling 
about to second him, falls in with all his force upon 
his flank, and with his Hungarian hussars, made 
such a furious charge, that the Swedes could stand 
no longer. 

The rout of the left wing was so much the more 

unhappy, as it happened just upon Gustavus Horn's 

coming up ; for, being pushed on with the enemies at 

their heels, they were driven upon their own friends, 

[143] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

who, having no ground to open and give them way, 
were trodden down by their own runaway brethren. 
This brought all into the utmost confusion. The 
Imperialists cried ^^ Victoria ! ^ and fell into the mid« 
die of the infantry with a terrible slaughter. 

I have always observed, ^t is fatal to upbraid an old 
experienced officer with want of courage. If Gusta vus 
Horn had not been whetted with the reproaches of 
the Baron D^Offkirk, and some of the other general 
officers, I believe it had saved the lives of a thousand 
men ; for when all was thus lost, several officers ad- 
vised him to make a retreat with such r^ments as 
he had yet unbroken; but nothing could persuade 
him to stir a foot. But turning his flank into a 
front, he saluted the enemy, as they passed by him 
in pursuit of the rest, with such terrible volleys of 
small shot, as cost them the lives of abundance of 
their men. 

The Imperialists, eager in the pursuit, left him 
unbroken, till the Spanish brigade came up and 
charged him. These he bravely repulsed with a great 
slaughter, and after them a body of dragoons ; till 
being laid at on every side, and most of his men 
killed, the brave old general, with all the rest that 
were left, were made prisoners. 

The Swedes had a terrible loss here, for almost all 
their infantry were killed or taken prisoners. 6us- 
tavus Horn refused quarter several times ; and still 
those that attacked him were cut down by his men, 
who fought like fiiries, and by the example of their 
general, behaved themselves like lions. But at last, 
these poor remains of a body of the bravest men in 
[ 144 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the world were forced to submit. I have heard him 
say, he had much rather have died than been taken, 
but that he yielded in compassion to so many brave 
men as were about him ; for none of them would 
take quarter till he gave his consent. 

I had the worst sh€u*e in this battle that ever I had 
in any action of my life ; and that was to be posted 
among as brave a body of horse as any in Germany, 
and yet not be able to succour our own men ; but 
our foot were cut in pieces (as it were) before our 
faces, and the situation of the ground was such as 
we could not fall in. All that we were able to do, 
was to carry off about 2000 of the foot, who, run- 
ning away in the rout of the left wing, rallied among 
our squadrons, and got away with us. Thus we stood 
till we saw all was lost, and then made the best 
retreat we could to save ourselves, several regiments 
having never charged, nor fired a shot ; for the foot 
had so embarrassed themselves among the lines and 
works of the enemy, and in the vineyards and moun- 
tains, that the horse were rendered absolutely 
unserviceable. 

The Rhinegrave had made such expedition to join 
us, that he reached within three miles of the place of 
action that night, and he was a great safeguard for 
us in rallying our dispersed men, who else had fallen 
into the enemy'*s hands, and in checking the pursuit 
of the enemy. 

And indeed, had but any considerable body of the 
foot made an orderly retreat, it had been very prob- 
able they had given the enemy a brush that would 
have turned the scale of victory ; for our horse being 
10 [ 146 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

whole, and in a manner untouched, the enemy found 
such a check in the pursuit, that 1600 of their 
forwardest men following too eagerly, fell in with 
the Rhinegrave^s advanced troops the next day, and 
were cut in pieces without mercy. 

This gave us some satisfaction for the loss, but it 
was but small compared to the ruin of that day. 
We lost near 8000 men upon the spot, and above 
3000 prisoners, all our cannon and baggage, and ISO 
colours, I thought I never made so indifferent a 
figure in my life, and so we thought all ; to come 
away, lose our infantry, our general, and our honour, 
and never fight for it. Duke Bemhard was utterly 
disconsolate for old Gustavus Horn, for he conclude 
him killed ; he tore the hair from his head like a 
madman, and telling the Rhinegrave the story of the 
council of war, would reproach himself with not 
taking his advice, often repeating it in his passion. 
** *r is I,^ said he, " have been the death of the bravest 
general in Grermany ;^ would call himself fool and 
boy, and such names, for not listening to the reasons 
of an old experienced soldier. But when he heard 
he was alive in the enemy^s hands he was the easier, 
and applied himself to the recruiting his troops, and 
the like business of the war ; and it was not long 
before he paid the Imperialists with interest. 

I returned to Frankfort-au-Main after this action, 
which happened the 17th of August 16S4 ; but the 
progress of the Imperialists was so great that there 
was no staying at Frankfort. The chancellor Oxen- 
stiem removed to Magdeburg, Duke Bemhard and 
the Landgrave marched into Alsatia, and the Impe- 
[146] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

rialists carried all before them for all the rest of the 
campaign. They took Philipsburg by surprise ; they 
took Augsburg by famine, Spire and Treves by 
si^es, taking the Elector prisoner. But this suc- 
cess did one piece of service to the Swedes, that it 
brought the French into the war on their side, for 
the Elector of Treves was their confederate. The 
French gave the conduct of the war to Duke Bern- 
hard. This, though the Duke of Saxony fell off, 
and fought against them, turned the scale so much 
in their favour, that they recovered their losses, and 
proved a terror to all Germany. The farther accounts 
of the war I refer to the histories of those times, which 
I have since read with a great deal of delight. 

I confess when I saw the progress of the Imperial 
army, after the battle of Nordlingen, and the Duke 
of Saxony turning his arms against them, I thought 
their affairs declining; and, giving them over for 
lost, I left Frankfort, and came down the Rhine to 
Cologne, and from thence into Holland. 

I came to the Hague the 8th of March 163d, hav- 
ing spent three years and a half in Grermany, and 
the greatest part of it in the Swedish army. 

I spent some time in Holland viewing the wonder- 
ful power of art, which I observed in the fortifica- 
tions of their towns, where the very bastions stand 
on bottomless morasses, and yet are as firm as any 
in the world. There I had the opportunity of 
seeing the Dutch army, and their famous general, 
Prince Maurice. TT is true, the men behaved them- 
selves well enough in action, when they were put to 
it, but the princess way of beating his enemies with- 
[147] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

out fighting, was so unlike the gallantry of my 
royal instructor, that it had no manner of relish 
with me* Our way in Germany was always to seek 
out the enemy and fight him; and, give the Im- 
perialists their due, they were seldom hard to be 
found, but were as free of their flesh as we were. 
Whereas Prince Maurice would lie in a camp till he 
starved half his men, if by lying there he could but 
starve two-thirds of his enemies ; so that indeed the 
war in Holland had more of fatigues and hardships 
in it, and ours had more of fighting and blows. 
Hasty marches, long and unwholesome encampments, 
winter parties, counter-marching, dodging and en- 
trenching, were the exercises of his men, and often- 
times killed him more men with hunger, cold and 
diseases, than he could do with fighting. Not that 
it required less courage, but rather more, for a 
soldier had at any time rather die in the field i la 
coup de meusquety than be starved with hunger, or 
frozen to death in the trenches. 

Nor do I think I lessen the reputation of that great 
general ; for ^t is most certain he mined the Spaniard 
more by spinning the war thus out in length, than 
he could possibly have done by a swift conquest. 
For had he, Gustavus-like, with a torrent of victory 
dislodged the Spaniard of all the twelve provinces in 
five years, whereas he was forty years a-beating them 
out of seven, he had left them rich and strong at 
home, and able to keep them in constant apprehen- 
sions of a return of his power. Whereas, by the 
long continuance of the war, he so broke the very 
heart of the Spanish monarchy, so absolutely and 
[148] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

'rrecoverably impoverished them, that they have, 
ever since languished of the disease, till they aif; . 
fallen from the most powerful, to be the most 
despicable nation in the world. 

The prodigious charge the King of Spain was at 
in losing the seven provinces, broke the very spirit of . 
the nation ; and that so much, that all the wealth 
of their Peruvian mountains have not been able to 
retrieve it ; King Philip having often declared that 
war, besides his Armada for invading England, had 
cost him 870,000,000 of ducats, and 4,000,000 of the 
best soldiers in Europe ; whereof, by an unreasonable 
Spanish obstinacy, above 60,000 lost their lives before ' 
Chstend, a town not worth a sixth part either of the 
blood or money it cost in a siege of three years ; and 
which at last he had never taken, but that Prince . 
Maurice thought it not worth the charge of defend-: 
ing it any longer. 

However, I say, their way of fighting in Holland 
did not relish with me at all. The prince lay a long 
time before a little fort called Schenkenschanz, which . 
the Spaniard took by surprise, and I thought he . 
might have taken it much sooner. Perhaps it might . 
be my mistake, but I fancied my hero, the King of 
Sweden, would have carried it sword in hand, in 
half the time. 

However it was, I did not like it ; so in the latter . 
end of the year I came to the Hague, and took, 
shipping for England, where I arrived, to the great 
satisfaction of my father and all my friends. 

My father was then in London, and carried me. 
to kiss the king^s hand. His Majesty was pleased to 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

receive me very well, and to say a great many very 
obliging things to my father upon my account. 

I spent my time very retired from court, for I was 
almost wholly in the country ; and it being so much 
different from my genius, which hankered after a 
warmer sport than hunting among our Welsh moun- 
tains, I could not but be peeping in all the foreign 
accounts from Germany, to see who and who was 
together. There I could never hear of a battle, and 
the Grermans being beaten, but I b^an to wish myself 
there. But when an account came of the progress of 
John Baner, the Swedish general in Saxony, and of 
the constant victories he had there over the Saxons, 
I could no longer contain myself, but told my father 
this life was very disagreeable to me; that I lost 
my time here, and might to much more advantage 
go into Germany, where I was sure I might make my 
fortune upon my own terms; that, as young as I 
was, I might have been a general officer by this 
time, if I had not laid down my commission ; that 
General Baner, or the Marshal Horn, had either 
of them so much respect for me, that I was sure I 
might have anything of them ; and that if he pleased 
to give me leave, I would go for Germany again. 
My £Gither was very unwilling to let me go, but see- 
ing me uneasy, told me that, if I was resolved, 
he would oblige me to stay no longer in Eng- 
land than the next spring, and I should have his 
consent. 

The winter following b^an to look very unpleasant 
upon us in England, and my father used often to 
sigh at it ; and would tell me sometimes he was 
[150] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

afraid we should have no need to send Englishmen 
to fight in Germany. 

The doud that seemed to threaten most was from 
Scotland. My father, who had made himself master 
of the arguments on both sides, used to be often say- 
ing he feared there was some about the king who 
exasperated him too much against the Scots, and 
drove things too high. For my part, I confess I did 
not much trouble my head with the cause ; but all 
my fear was they would not fall out, and we should 
have no fighting. I have often reflected since, that 
I ought to have known better, that had seen how 
the most flourishing provinces of Grermany were re- 
duced to the most miserable condition that ever 
any country in the world was, by the ravagings of 
soldiers, and the calamities of war. 

How much soever I was to blame, yet so it was, 
I had a secret joy at the news of the king^s raising 
an army, and nothing could have withheld me from 
appearing in it ; but my eagerness was anticipated 
by an express the king sent to my father, to know if 
his son was in England; and my father having 
ordered me to carry the answer myself, I waited upon 
his Majesty with the messenger. The king received 
me with his usual kindness, and asked me if I was 
willing to serve him against the Scots? 

I answered, I was ready to serve him against any 
that his majesty thought fit to account his enemies, 
and should count it an honour to receive his com- 
mands. Hereupon his Majesty offered me a com- 
mission. I told him, I supposed there would not 
be much time for raising of men ; that if his Majesty 
[161] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

pleased I would be at the rendezvous with as many 
gentlemen as I could get together, to serve his 
Majesty as volunteers. 

The tiiith is, I found all the regiments of horse 
the king designed to raise were but two as raiments ; 
the rest of the horse were such as the nobility ittised 
in their several counties, and commanded them 
themselves ; and, as I had commanded a regiment of 
horse abroad, it looked a little odd to serve with 
a single troop at home ; and the king took the thing 
presently. " Indeed ^t will be a volunteer war,'' said 
the king, " for the Northern gentry have sent me an 
account of above 4000 horse they have already." 
I bowed, and told his Majesty I was glad to hear 
his subjects were so forward to serve him. So taking 
his Majesty's oixlers to be at York by the end of 
March, I returned to my father. 

My father was very glad I had not taken a com- 
mission, for I know not from what kind of emula- 
tion between the western and northern gentry. The 
gentlemen of our side were not very forward in the 
service ; their loyalty to the king in the succeeding 
times made it appear it was not from any disaffection 
to his Majesty's interest or person, or to the cause ; 
but this, however, made it difficult for me when I 
came home to get any gentleman of quality to serve 
with me, so that I presented myself to his Majesty 
only as a volunteer, with eight gentlemen and about 
thirty-six countrymen well mounted and armed. 

And as it proved, these were enough, for this ex- 
pedition ended in an accommodation with the Scots ; 
and they not advancing so much as to their own 
[162] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

borders, we never came to any ^u;tion. But the 
armies lay in the counties of Northumberland and 
Durham, ate up the country, and spent the king a 
vast sum of money ; and so this war ended, a pacifi- 
cation was made, and both sides returned. 

The truth is, I never saw such a despicable appear- 
ance of men in arms to begin a war in my life ; 
whether it was that I had seen so many braver 
armies abroad that prejudiced me against them, or 
that it really was so ; for to me they seemed little bet- 
ter than a rabble met together to devour, rather 
than fight for theirj king and country. There was 
indeed a great appearance of gentlemen, and those 
of extraordinary quality; but their garb, their 
equipages, and their mien, did not look like war; 
their troops were filled with footmen and servants, 
and wretchedly armed, God wot. I believe I might 
say, without vanity, one regiment of Finland horse 
would have made sport at hneating them all. There 
were such crowds of parsons (for this was a Church 
war in particular) that the camp and court was full 
of them ; and the king was so eternally besieged with 
clergymen of one sort or another, that it gave offence 
to the chief of the nobility. 

As was the appearance, so was the service. The 
army marched to the borders, and the headquarter 
was at Berwick-upon-Tweed; but the Scots never 
appeared, no, not so much as their scouts ; where- 
upon the king called a council of war, and there it 
was resolved to send the Earl of Holland with a 
party of horse into Scotland, to learn some news 
of the enemy. And truly the first news he brought 
[163] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

us was, that finding their army encamped about 
Coldingham, fifteen miles from Berwick, as soon as 
he appeared, the Scots drew out a party to charge 
him, upon which most of his men halted — I don^t 
say run away, but 'twas next door to it — for they 
could not be persuaded to fire their pistols, and 
wheel off like soldiers, but retreated in such a dis- 
orderly and shameful manner, that had the enemy 
but had either the courage or conduct to have fol- 
lowed them, it must have certainly ended in the 
ruin of the whole party. 



[164] 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE SECOND PART 

I CONFESS, when I went into arms at the be- 
ginning of this war, I never troubled myself 
to examine sides: I was glad to hear the 
drums beat for soldiers, as if I had been a 
mere Swiss, that had not cared which side went up 
or down, so I had my pay. I went as eagerly and 
blindly about my business, as the meanest wretch that 
'listed in the army; nor had I the least compas- 
sionate thought for the miseries of my native coun- 
try, till afber the fight at EdgehilL I had known 
as much, and perhaps more than most in the army, 
what it was to have an enemy ranging in the bowels 
of a kingdom ; I had seen the most flourishing 
provinces of Germany reduced to perfect deserts, 
and the voracious Crabats, with inhuman barbarity, 
quenching the fires of the plundered villages with 
the blood of the inhabitants* Whether this had 
hardened me against the natural tenderness which I 
afterwards found return upon me, or not, I cannot 
tell ; but I reflected upon myself afterwards with a 
great deal of trouble, for the unconcemedness of 
my temper at the approaching ruin of my native 
countiy. 

I was in the first army at York, as I have already 
noted, and, I must confess, had the least diversion 
there that ever I found in an army in my life. For 
[166] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

when I was in Germany with the King of Sweden, 
we used to see the king with the general officers 
every morning on horseback viewing his men, his 
artillery, his horses, and always something going for- 
ward. Here we saw nothing but courtiers and 
clergymen, bishops and parsons, as busy as if the 
direction of tlie war had been in them. The king 
was seldom seen among us, and never without some 
of them always about him. 

Those few of us that had seen the wars, and would 
have made a short end of this for him, began to be 
very uneasy ; and particularly a certain nobleman 
took the freedom to tell the king that the clergy 
would certainly ruin the expedition. The case was 
this : he would have had the king have immediately 
marched into Scotland, and put the matter to the 
trial of a battle ; and he urged it every day. And 
the king finding his reasons very good, would often 
be of his opinion ; but next morning he would be of 
another mind. 

This gentleman was a man of conduct enough, and 
of unquestioned courage, and afterwards lost his life 
for the king. He saw we had an army of young 
stout fellows numerous enough ; and though they 
had not yet seen much service, he was for bringing 
them to action, that the Scots might not have time 
to strengthen themselves, nor they have time by 
idleness and sotting, the bane of soldiers, to make 
themselves unfit for anything. 

I was one morning in company with this gentle- 
man ; and as he was a warm man, and eager in his 
discourse, '* A pox of these priests,^ says he^ '^^tis 
[1561 



Digitized by 



Googk 



A CERTAIN NOIU.KINIAN ANM) TUK CAVAIJER 
DISCUSS THE WAR 



" These prksts^'' says he^ ^^"t is for them the king has 
raised this army ; and now ive are come^ they tconH 
kt lis fi^htr' 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 













C0l'rRlOHr.l903.flYr»E UNtVERsrXY PRE 



( Of- 



Digitized by 



Googk 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAiVALlJfiR 

for them the king has raised this army, and put his 
friends to a vast charge ; and now we are come, they 
won't let us fight.'' 

But I was afterwards convinced the clergy saw 
further into the matter than we did. They saw the 
Scots had a better army than we had — bold and ready, 
commanded by bmve officers — and they foresaw that 
if we fought we should be beaten, and if beaten, they 
were undone. And 't was very true, we had all been 
ruined if we had engaged. 

It is true when we came to the pacification which 
followed, I confess I was of the same mind the gen- 
tleman had been of; for we had better have fought 
and been beaten than have made so dishonourable 
a treaty without striking a stroke. This pacifica- 
tion seems to me to have laid the scheme of all 
the blood and confusion which followed in the Civil 
War. For whatever the king and his friends might 
pretend to do by talking big, the Scots saw he was 
to be bullied into anything, and that when it came 
to the push the courtiers never cared to bring it to 
blows. 

I have little or nothing to say as to action in this 
mock expedition. The king was persuaded at last 
to march to Berwick ; and, as I have said already, a 
party of horse went out to learn news of the Scots, 
and as soon as they saw them, ran away from them 
bravely. 

This made the Scots so insolent that, whereas 

before they lay encamped behind a river, and never 

showed themselves, in a sort of modest deference to 

their king, which was the pretence of not being 

[167] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

aggressors or invaders, only arming in their own 
defence, now, having been invaded by the English 
troops entering Scotland, they had what they wanted. 
And to show it was not fear that retained them 
before, but policy, now they came up in parties to 
our very gates, braving and facing us every day. 

I had, with more curiosity than discretion, put 
myself as a volunteer at the head of one of our 
parties of horse, under my Lord Holland, when they 
went out to discover the enemy; they went, they 
said, to see what the Scots were a-doing. 

We had not marched far, but our scouts brought 
word they had discovered some horse, but could not 
come up to them, because a river parted them. At 
the heels of these came another party of our men 
upon the spur to us, and said the enemy was behind, 
which might be true for aught wc knew ; but it was 
so far behind that nobody could see them, and yet 
the country was plain and open for above a mile 
before us. Hereupon we made a halt, and, indeed, 
I was afraid it would [have been an odd sort of a 
halt, for our men began to look one upon another, 
as they do in like cases, when they are going to 
break ; and when the scouts came ^dloping in the 
men were in such disorder, that had but one man 
broke away, I am satisfied they had all run for it. 

I found my Lord Holland did not perceive it ; but 
after the first surprise was a little over I told my lord 
what I had observed, and that unless some course was 
immediately taken they would all run at the first 
sight of the enemy. I found he was much concerned 
at it, and began to consult what course to take to 
[168] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

prevent it. I confess ^tis a hard question how to 
make men stand and face an enemy, when fear has 
possessed their minds with an inclination to run away. 
But 111 give that honour to the memory of that 
noble gentleman, who, though his experience in mat- 
ters of war was small, having never been in much 
service, yet his courage made amends for it ; for I 
dare say he would not have turned his horse from an 
army of enemies, nor have saved his life at the price 
of running away for it. 

My lord soon saw, as well as I, the fright the men 
were in, after I had given him a hint of it ; and to 
encourage them, rode through their ranks and spoke 
cheerfully to them, and used what arguments he 
thought proper to settle their minds. I remembered 
a saying which I had heard old Marshal Gustavus 
Horn speak in Germany, "If you find your men 
falter, or in doubt, never suffer them to halt, but 
keep them advancing ; for while they are going for- 
waixJ, it keeps up their courage.'^ 

As soon as I could get opportunity to speak to 
him, I gave him this as my opinion. "That's very 
well,^ says my lord, " but I am studying,"" says he, " to 
post them so as that they can't run if they would ; 
and if they stand but once to face the enemy, I don't 
fear them afterwards.** 

While we were discoursing thus, word was brought 
that several parties of the enemies were seen on the 
farther side of the river, upon which my lord gave 
the word to march ; and as we were marching on, my 
lord calls out a lieutenant who had been an old sol* 
dier, with only five troopers whom he had most con- 
[169] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

fidence in, and having given him his lesson, he sends 
him away. In a quarter of an hour one of the five 
troopers comes back galloping and hallooing, and 
tells us his lieutenant had, with his small party, 
beaten a party of twenty of the enemy's horse over 
the river, and had secured the pass, and desired my 
lord would march up to him immediately. 

^ is a strange thing that men's spirits should be 
subjected to such sudden changes, and capable of so 
much alteration from shadows of things. They were 
for running before they saw the enemy, now they are 
in haste to be led on, and but that in raw men we 
are obliged to bear with anything, the disoi*der in 
both was intolerable. 

The story was a premeditated sham, and not a 
word of truth in it, invented to raise their spirits, 
and cheat them out of their cowardly phlegmatic ap- 
prehensions, and my lord had his end in it ; for they 
were all on fire to fall on. And I am persuaded, 
had they been led immediately into a battle b^un 
to their hands, they would have laid about them like 
furies ; for there is nothing like victory to flush a 
young soldier. Thus, while the humour was high, 
and the fermentation lasted, away we marched, and, 
passing one of their great commons, which they call 
moors, we came to the river, as he called it, where 
our lieutenant was posted with his four men ; 't was 
a little brook fordable with ease, and, leaving a 
guard at the pass, we advanced to the top of a smal 
ascent, from whence we had a fair view of the Scots 
army, as they lay behind another river laiger than 
the former. 

[160] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIEft 

Our men were posted well enough, behind a small 
enclosure, with a narrow lane in their front. And 
my lord had caused his dragoons to be placed in 
the front to line the hedges ; and in this posture he 
stood viewing the enemy at a distance. The Scots, 
who had some intelligence of our coming, drew out 
three small parties, and sent them by different ways 
to observe our number; and, forming a fourth 
party, which I guessed to be about 600 horse, 
advanced to the top of the plain, and drew up to 
face us, but never offered to attack us. 

One of the small parties, making about 100 men, 
one thii*d foot, passes upon our flank in view, but 
out of reach ; and, as they marched, shouted at us, 
which our men, better pleased with that work than 
with fighting, readily enough answered, and would 
fain have fired at them for the pleasure of making a 
noise, for they were too far off to hit them. 

I observed that these parties had always some foot 
with them ; and yet if the horse galloped, or pushed 
on ever so forward, the foot were as forward as they, 
which was an exti*aordinary advantage. 

Gustavus Adolphus, that king of soldiers, was the 
first that I have ever observed found the advantage 
of mixing small bodies of musketeers among his 
horse ; and, had he had such nimble strong fellows 
OS these, he would have prized them above all the 
rest of his men. These were those they call High- 
landers. They would run on foot with their arms 
and all their accoutrements, and keep very good 
order too, and yet keep pace with the horse, let 
them go at what rate they would. When I saw the 
H [ 161 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

foot thus interlined among the horse, together with 
the way of ordering their flying parties, it presently 
occurred to my mind that here was some of our old 
Scots come home out of Grermany that had the 
ordering of matters, and if so, I knew we were not 
a match for them. 

Thus we stood facing the enemy till our scouts 
brought us word the whole Scots army was in 
motion, and in full march to attack us ; and, though 
it was not true, and the fear of our men doubled 
every object, yet *t was thought convenient to make 
our retreat. The whole matter was that the scouts 
having informed them what they could of our 
strength, the 600 were ordered to march towards 
us, and three regiments of foot were drawn out to 
suppoii the horse. 

I know not whether they would have ventured to 
attack us, at least before their foot had come up ; 
but whether they would have put it to the hazard 
or no, we were resolved not to hazard the trial, so 
we di'ew down to the pass. And, as retreating looks 
something like running away, especially when an 
enemy is at hand, our men had much ado to make 
their retreat pass for a march, and not a flight ; and, 
by their often looking behind them, anybody might 
know what they would have done if they had been 



I confess, I was heartily ashamed when the Scots, 
coming up to the place where we had been posted, 
stood and shouted at us. I would have persuaded my 
lord to have charged them, and he would have done 
it with all his heart, but he saw it was not practica* 
[162] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

ble ; so we stood at gaze with them above two hours, 
by which time their foot were come up to them, and 
yet they did not offer to attack us. I never was so 
asham^ of myself in my life ; we were all dispirited. 
The Scots gentlemen would come out singly, within 
shot of our post, which in a time of war is always 
accounted a challenge to any single gentleman, to 
come out and exchange a pistol with them, and no- 
body would stir ; at last our old lieutenant rides out 
to meet a Scotchman that came pickeering on his 
quarter. This lieutenant was a brave and a strong 
fellow, had been a soldier in the Low Countries; 
and though he was not of any quality, only a mere 
soldier, had his preferment for his conduct. He 
gallops bravely up to his adversary, and exchanging 
their pistols, the lieutenant^s horse happened to be 
killed. The ScotchmanJ very generously dismounts, 
and engages him with his sword, and fairly masters 
him, and carries him away prisoner; and I think 
this horse was all the blood was shed in that war. 

The lieutenant^s name thus conquered was English, 
and as he was a very stout old soldier, the disgrace of 
it broke his heart. The Scotchman, indeed, used 
him very generously ; for he treated him in the camp 
very courteously, gave him another horse, and set 
him at liberty, gratis. But the man laid it so to 
heart, that he never would appear in the army, but 
went home to his own country and died. 

I had enough of party-making, and was quite sick 

with indignation at the cowardice of the men ; and 

my lord was in as great a fret as I, but there was no 

remedy. We durst not go about to retreat, for we 

[163] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

should have been in such confusion that the enemy 
! oiust have discovered it : so my loi'd resolved to keep 
the post, if possible, and send to the king for some 
foot. Then were our men ready to fight with one 
another who should be the messenger ; and at last 
when a lieutenant with twenty dragoons was de- 
spatched, he told us afterwards he found himself an 
hundred strong before he was gotten a mile from the 
place. 

In short, as soon as ever the day declined, and the 
dusk of the evening began to shelter the designs of 
the men, they dropped away from us one by one ; 
and at last in such numbers, that if we had stayed 
till the morning, we had not had fifty men left, out 
of ISOO horse and dragoons. 

When I saw how it was, consulting with some of 
the officers, we all went to my Lord Holland, and 
pressed him to retreat, before the enemy should 
discern the flight of our men ; so he drew us off, 
and we came to the camp the next morning, in the 
shamefuUest condition that ever poor men could do. 
And this was the end of the worst expedition ever 
I made in my life. 

To fight and be beaten is a casualty common to 
a soldier, and I have since had enough of it ; but 
to run away at the sight of an enemy&gt; and neither 
strike or be stricken, this is the very shame of the 
profession, and no man that has done it ought to 
show his face again in the field, unless disadvan- 
tages of place or number make it tolerable, neither 
of which was our case. 

My Lord Holland made another march a few days 
[164] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

after, in hopes to retrieve this miscarriage ; but I 
had enough of it, so I kept in my quarters. And 
though his men did not desert him as before, yet 
upon the appearance of the enemy they did not 
think fit to %ht, and came off with but little more 
honour than they did before. 

There was no need to go out to seek the enemy 
after this, for they came, as I have noted, and pitched 
in sight of us, and their parties came up every day 
to the very out-works of Berwick, but nobody cared 
to meddle with them. And in this postui'e things 
stood when the pacification was agreed on by both 
parties, which, like a short truce, only gave both sides 
breath to prepare for a new war more ridiculously 
managed than the former. When the treaty was so 
near a conclusion as that conversation was admitted 
on both sides, I went over to the Scotch camp to 
satisfy my curiosity, as many of our English officers 
did also. 

I confess the soldiers made a very uncouth figure, 
especially the Highlanders. The oddness and bar- 
barity of their garb and arms seemed to have some^ ' 
thing in it remarkable. 

They were generally tall swinging fellows ; their 
swords were extravagantly, and, I think, insig- 
nificantly broad, and they carried great wooden 
targets, large enough to cover the upper part of 
their bodies. Their dress was as antique as the 
rest ; a cap on their heads, called by them a bonnet^ 
long hanging sleeves behind, and their doublet, 
breeches, and stockings of a stuff they called plaid, 
striped across red and yellow, with short cloaks of 
[166] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the same. These fellows looked, when drawn out, 
like a regiment of merry andrews, ready for Barthol* 
omew Fair. They are in companies all of a name, 
and therefore call one another only by their Chris- 
tian names, as Jemmy, Jockey, that is, John, and 
Sawny, that is Alexander, and the like. And they 
scorn to be commanded but by one of their own 
dan or family. They are all gentlemen, and proud 
enough to be kings. The meanest fellow among 
them is as tenacious of his honour as the best 
nobleman in the country, and they will fight and cut 
one another*s throats for every trifling affiront. 

But to their own clans or lairds, they are the will* 
ingest and most obedient fellows in nature. Give 
them their due, were their skill in exercises and dis« 
oipline proportioned to their courage, they would 
make the bravest soldiers in the world. They are 
laige bodies, and prodigiously strong ; and two qual* 
ities they have above other nations, viz., hai*dy to 
endure hunger, cold, and hardships, and wonderfully 
swift of foot. The latter is such an advantage in 
the field that I know none like it ; for if they con* 
quer, no enemy can escape them, and if they run, 
even the horse can hardly overtake them. These 
were some of them, who, as I observed before, went 
out in parties with their horse. 

There were three or four thousand of these in the 
Scots army, armed only with swords and targets ; 
and in their belts some of them had a pistol, but no 
muskets at that time among them. 

But there were also a great many raiments of dis* 
ciplined men, who, by their carrying their arms, 
[166] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

looked as if they understood their business, and by 
their faces, that they durst see an enemy. 

I had not been half-an-hour in their camp after 
the ceremony of giving our names, and passing their 
out-guards and main-guards was over, but I was 
saluted by several of my acquaintance ; and in par- 
ticular, by one who led the Scotch volunteers at 
the taking the castle of Oppenheim, of which I 
have given an account. They used me with all the 
respect they thought due to me, on account of old 
aifairs, gave me the word, and a sergeant waited 
upon me whenever I pleased to go abroad. 

I continued twelve or fourteen days among them, 
till the pacification was concluded ; and they were 
ordered to march home. They spoke very respect- 
fully of the king, but I found were exasperated to 
the last degree at Archbishop Laud and the English 
bishops, for endeavouring to impose the Common 
Prayer Book upon them ; and they always talked 
with the utmost contempt of our soldiers and army. 
I always waived the discourse about the clergy, and 
the occasion of the war, but I could not but be too 
sensible what they said of oiu* men was true; and 
by this I perceived they had an imiversal intelligence 
from among us, both of what we were doing, and 
what sort of people we were that were doing it; 
and they were mighty desirous of coming to blows 
with us. I had an invitation from their general, 
but I declined it, lest I should give ofience. I found 
they accepted the pacification as a thing not likely 
to hold, or that they did not design should hold ; 
and that they were resolved to keep their forces on 
[167] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

foot, notwithstanding the agreement. Their whole 
army was full of brave officers, men of as much 
experience and conduct as any in the world ; and all 
men who know anything of the war, know good 
officers presently make a good army. 

Things being thus huddled up, the English came 
back to York, where the army separated, and the 
Scots went home to increase theirs ; for I easily fore- 
saw that peace was the farthest thing fi*om their 
thoughts. 

The next year the flame broke out again. The : 
king draws his forces down into the north, as before, 
and expresses were sent to all the gentlemen that 
had commands to be at the place by the 16th of 
July. As I had accepted of no command in the 
army, so I had no inclination at all to go, for I 
foresaw there would be nothing but disgrace attend 
it My Mher, observing such an alteration in my 
usual forwardness, asked me one day what was the 
matter, that I who used to be so forward to go into 
the army, and so eager to run abroad to fight, now 
showed no inclination to appear when the service of 
the king and country called me to it ? I told him I 
had as much zeal as ever for the king^s service, and 
for the country too: but he knew a soldier could 
not abide to be beaten ; and being from thence a 
little more inquisitive, I told him the observations 
I had made in the Scots army, and the people I had 
conversed with there. " And, sir,*' says I, " assure 
yourself, if the king offers to fight them, he will be 
beaten ; and I don't love to engage when my judg* 
ment tells me beforehand I shall be worsted.** And 
[168] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

as I had foreseen, it came to pass ; for the Scots re- 
solving to proceed, never stood upon the ceremony 
of aggression, as before, but on the SOth of August 
they entered England with their arm;'. 

However, as my father desired, I went to the 
king's army, which was then at York, but not gotten 
all together. The king himself was at London, but 
upon this news takes post for the army, and advanc* 
ing a p€u*t of his forces, he posted the Lord Conway 
and Sir Jacob Astley, with a brigade of foot and 
some horse, at Newbum, upon the river Tyne, to 
keep the Scots from passing that river. 

The Scots could have passed the Tyne without 
fighting ; but to let us see that they were able to 
force their passage, they fall upon this body of men, 
and notwithstanding all the advantages of the place, 
they beat them from the post, took their baggage 
and two pieces of cannon, with some prisoners. Sir 
Jacob Astley made what resistance he could, but 
the Scots charged with so much fury, and being also 
overpowered, he was soon put into confusion. Im- 
mediately the Scots made themselves masters of New- 
castle, and the next day of Durham, and laid those 
two counties under intolerable contributions. 

Now was the king absolutely ruined ; for among 
his own people the discontents before were so plain, 
that had the clergy had any forecast, they would 
never have embroiled him with the Scots, till he had 
fully brought matters to an understanding at home. 
But the case was thus : the king, by the good hus- 
bandry of Bishop Juxon, his treasurer, had a million 
of ready money in his treasury, and upon that 
1169] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

account, having no need of a Parliament, had not 
called one in twelve years : and perhaps had never 
called another, if he had not by this unhappy cir- 
cumstance been reduced to a necessity of it ; for now 
this ready money was spent in two foolish expedi- 
tions, and his army appeai'ed in a condition not fit 
to engage the Scots. The detachment under Sir 
Jacob Astley, which were of the flower of his men, 
had been routed at Newburn, and the enemy had 
possession of two entire counties. 

All men blamed Laud for prompting the king to 
provoke the Scots, a headstrong nation, and zealous 
for their own way of worship ; and Laud himself 
found too late the consequences of it, both to the 
whole cause and to himself; for the Scots, whose 
native temper is not easily to forgive an injury, pur- 
sued him by their party in England, and never gave 
it over till they laid his head on the block. 

The ruined country now clamoured in his Majesty^s 
ears with daily petitions, and the gentry of other 
neighbouring counties cry out for peace and a Parlia- 
ment. The king, embarrassed with these difficulties, 
and quite empty of money, calls a great council of 
the nobility at York, and demands their advice, which 
any one could have told him before would be to call 
a Parliament. 

I cannot, without regret, look back upon the mis- 
fortune of the king, who, as he was one of the best 
princes in his personal conduct that ever reigned in 
England, had yet some of the greatest unhappinesses 
in his conduct as a king, that ever prince had, and 
the whole course of his life demonstrated it. 
[170] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

' 1. An impolitic honesty. His enemies called it 
obstinacy; but as I was perfectly acquainted with 
his temper, I cannot but think it was his judgment, 
when he thought he was in the right, to adhere to it 
as a duty though against his interest. 

S. Too much compliance when he was complying. 

No man but himself would have denied what at 
some times he denied, and have granted what at other 
times he granted ; and this uncertainty of counsel 
proceeded from two things. 

1. The heat of the clergy, to whom he was ex- 
ceedingly devoted, and for whom, indeed, he ruined 
himself. 

2. The wisdom of his nobility. 

Thus when the counsel of his priests prevailed, all 
was fire and fury ; the Scots were rebels, and must 
be subdued, and the Parliaments demands were to 
be rejected as exorbitant, fiut whenever the king^s 
judgment was led by the grave and steady advice of 
liis nobility and counsellor, he was always inclined 
by them to temperate his measures between the two 
extremes. And had he gone on in such a temper, he 
had never met with the misfortunes which afterward 
attended him, or had so many thousands of his friends 
lost their lives and fortunes in his service. 

I am sure we that knew what it was to fight for 
him, and that loved him better than any of the clergy 
could pretend to, have had many a consultation how 
to bring over our master from so espousing their in- 
terest, as to ruin himself for it ; but ^t was in vain. 

I took this interval when I sat still and only looked 
on, to make these remarks, because I remember the 
[171] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

best friends the king had were at this time of that 
opinion, that ^t was an unaccountable piece of indis- 
cretion, to commence a quarrelVith the Scots, a poor 
and obstinate people, for a ceremony and book of 
Church discipline, at a time when the king stood but 
upon indifferent terms with his people at home. 

The consequence was, it put arms into the hands 
of his subjects to rebel against him ; it embroiled him 
with his Parliament in England, to whom he was fain 
to stoop in a fatal and unusual manner to get money, 
all his own being spent, and so to buy off the Scots 
whom he could not beat off. 

I cannot but give one instance of the unaccount- 
able politics of his ministers. If they oven*uled this 
unhappy king to it, with design to exhaust and im-« 
poverish him, they were the worst of traitors ; if not, 
the grossest of fools. They prompted the king to 
equip a fleet against the Scots, and to put on board 
it 5000 land men. Had this been all, the design had 
been good, that while the king had faced the army 
upon the borders, tliese 5000, landing in the Firth 
of Edinburgh, might have put that whole nation 
into disorder. But in order to this, they advised 
the king to lay out his money in fitting out the 
biggest ships he had, and the ** Royal Sovereign,^ the 
biggest ship the world had ever seen, which cost him 
no less than ^100,000, was now built, and fitted out 
for this voyage. 

This was the most incongruous and ridiculous ad- 
vice that could be given, and made us all believe we 
were betrayed, though we knew not by whom. 

To fit out ships of 100 guns to invade Scotland^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

which had not one man-of-war in the world, nor any 
open confederacy with any prince or state that had 
any fleet, ^t was a most ridiculous thing. An hun- 
dred sail of Newcastle colliers, to carry the men vrith 
their stores and provisions, and ten frigates of 40 
guns each, had been as good a fleet as reason and the 
nature of the thing could have made tolerable. 

Thus things were carried on, till the king, beggared 
by the mismanagement of his counsels, and beaten 
by the Scots, was driven to the necessity of calling a 
Parliament in England. 

It is not my design to enter into the feuds and 
brangles of this Parliament. I have noted, by ob- 
servations of their mistakes, who brought the king 
to this happy necessity of calling them. 

His Majesty had tried Parliament upon several 
occasions before, but never found himself so much 
embroiled with them but he could send them home, 
and there was an end of it ; but as he could not avoid 
calling these, so they took care to put him out of a 
condition to dismiss them. 

The Scots army was now quartered upon the 
English. The counties, the gentry, and the assembly 
of lords at York, petitioned for a Parliament. 

The Scots presented their demands to the king, in 
which it was observed that matters were concerted 
between them and a party in England ; and I confess 
when I saw that, I began to think the king in an ill 
case; for as the Scots pretended grievances, we 
thought, the king redressing those grievances, they 
could ask no more; and therefore all men advised 
the king to grant their full demands. And whereas 
[178] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the king had not money to supply the Scots in their 
march home, I know there were several meetings 
of gentlemen with a design to advance considerable 
sums of money to the king to set him free, and in 
order to reinstate his Majesty, as before. Not that 
we ever advised the king to rule without a Parlia- 
ment, but we were very desirous of putting him 
out of the necessity of calling them, at least just 
then. 

But the eighth article of the Scots^ demands 
expressly required, that an English Parliament might 
be called to remove all obstructions of commerce, and 
to settle peace, religion, and libei*ty ; and in another 
article they tell the king, the ^ith of September 
being the time his Majesty appointed for the meet- 
ing of the peers, will make it too long ere the 
Parliament meet. And in another, that a Parliament 
was the only way of settling peace, and bring them 
to his Majesty^s obedience. 

When we saw this in the army, 't was time to look 
about. Everybody perceived that the Scots army 
would call an English Parliament; and whatever 
aversion the king had to it, we all saw he would be 
obliged to comply with it ; and now they all began to 
see their error, who advised the king to this Scotch 
war. 

While these things were transacting, the assembly 
of the peers meet at York, and by their advice a 
treaty was begun with the Scots. I had the honour 
to be sent with the first message which was in 
writing. 

I brought it, attended by a trumpet and a guard 
[174] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

of 500 horse, to the Scots quarters. I was stopped 
at Darlington, and my errand being known, Gen- 
eral Leslie sent a Scots major and fifty horse to 
receive me, but would let neither my trumpet 
or guard set foot within their quarters. In this 
manner I was conducted to audience in the chapter- 
house at Durham, where a committee of Scots lords 
who attended the army received me very courteously, 
and gave me their answer in writing also. 

TT was in this answer that they showed, at least to 
me, their design of embroiling the king with his Eng- 
lish subjects ; they discoursed very freely with me, and 
did not order me to withdraw when they debated 
their private opinions. They drew up several an- 
swers but did not like them; at last they gave 
me one which I did not receive, I thought it was too 
insolent to be borne with. As near as I can remem- 
ber it was thus : The commissioners of Scotland at- 
tending the service in the army, do refuse any treaty 
in the city of York. 

One of the commissioners who treated me with 
more distinction than the i^est, and discoursed freely 
with me, gave me an opportunity to speak more 
fi*eely of this than I expected. 

I told them if they would return to his Majesty 
an answer fit for me to carry, or if they would say 
they would not treat at all, I would deliver such a 
message. But I entreated them to consider the 
answer was to their sovereign, and to whom they 
made a great profession of duty and respect, and at 
least they ought to give their reasons why they 
declined a treaty at York, and to name some 
[175] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

other place, or humbly to desire his Majesty to 
name some other place ; but to send word they 
would not treat at York, I could deliver no such 
message, for when put into English it would signify 
they would not treat at all. 

I used a great many reasons and ailments with 
them on this head, and at last with some difficulty 
obtained of them to give the reason, which was the 
Earl of Strafford'^s having the chief command at 
York, whom they declared their mortal enemy, he 
having declared them rebels in Ireland. 

With this answer I returned. I could make no 
observations in the short time I was with them, for 
as I stayed but one night, so I was guarded as a close 
prisoner all the while. I saw several of their offi- 
cei*s whom I knew, but they durst not speak to me, 
and if they would have ventured, my guard would 
not have permitted them. 

In this manner I was conducted out of their quar- 
ters to my own party again, and having delivered my 
message to the king and told his Majesty the cir- 
cumstances, I saw the king receive the account of 
the haughty behaviour of the Scots with some 
r^ret ; however, it was his Majesty^s time now to 
bear, and therefore the Scots were complied with, 
and the treaty appointed at Ripon ; where, after 
much debate, several preliminary articles were agreed 
on, as a cessation of arms, quarters, and bounds to 
the armies, subsistence to the Scots army, apd the 
residue of the demands was referred to a treaty at 
London, &amp;c. 

We were all amazed at the treaty, and I cannot 
;[.176] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

but remember we used to wish much rather we had 
been suffered to fight; for though we had been 
worsted at first, the power and strength of the king^s 
interest, which was not yet tried, must, in fine, have 
been too strong for the Scots, whereas now we saw 
the king was for complying with anything, and all 
his friends would be ruined. 

I confess I had nothing to fear, and so was not 
much concerned, but our predictions soon came to 
pass, for no sooner was this Parliament called but 
abundance of those who had embroiled their king 
with his people of both kingdoms, like the disciples 
when their Master was betrayed to the Jews, forsook 
him and fled ; and now Parliament tyranny began 
to^succeed Church tyranny, and we soldiers were glad 
to see it at first. The bishops trembled, the judges 
went to gaol, the officers of the customs were laid 
hold on; and the Parliament began to lay their 
fingers on the great ones, particularly Archbishop 
Laud and the Earl of Strafford. We had no great 
concern for the first, but the last was a man of so 
much conduct and gallantry, and so beloved by the 
soldiers and principal gentry of England, that every* 
body was touched with his misfortune. 

The Parliament now grew mad in their turn, and 
as the prosperity of any party is the time to show 
their discretion, the Parliament showed they knew 
as little where to stop as other people. The king 
was not in a condition to deny anything, and noth^ 
ing could be demanded but they pushed it. They 
attainted the Earl of Strafford, and thereby made 
the king cut off his right hand to save his left, and 
12 [ 177 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

yet not save it neither. They obtained another bill 
to empower them to sit during their own pleasure 
and after them, triennial Parliaments to meet, 
whether the king call them or no; and granting 
this completed his Majesty^s ruin. 

Had the House only r^ulated the abuses of the 
court, punished evil counsellors, and restored Parlia- 
ments to their original and just powers, all had been 
well, and the king, though he had been more than 
mortified, had yet reaped the benefit of future peace ; 
for now the Scots were sent home, after having eaten 
up two counties, and received a prodigious sum of 
money to boot And the king, though too late, 
goes in person to Edinburgh, and grants them all 
they could desire, and more than they asked ; but in 
England, the desires of ours were unbounded, and 
drove at all extremes. 

They threw out the bishops from sitting in the 
House, make a protestation equivalent to the Scotch 
Covenant, and this done, print their remonstrance. 
This so provoked the king, that he resolves upon 
seizing some of the members, and in an ill hour enters 
the House in person to take them. Thus one impru* 
dent thing on one hand produced another of the 
other hand, till the king was obliged to leave them 
to themselves, for fear of being mobbed into some- 
thing or other unworthy of himself. 

These proceedings began to alarm the gentry and 
nobility of England ; for, however willing we were to 
have evil counsellors removed, and the government 
return to a settled and legal course, according to the 
happy constitution of this nation, and might have 
[178] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

been forward enough to have owned the king had 
been misled, and imposed upon to do things which 
he had rather had not been done, yet it did not follow, 
that all the powers and prerogatives of the crown 
should devolve upon the Parliament, and the king in 
a manner be deposed, or else sacrificed to the fury of 
the rabble. 

The heats of the House running them thus to all 
extremes, and at last to take from the king the power 
of the militia, which indeed was all that was left to 
make him anything of a king, put the king upon 
opposing force with force; and thus the flame of 
civil war began. 

However backward I was in engaging in the 
second yearns expedition against the Scots, I was as 
forward now, for I waited on the king at York, 
where a gallant company of gentlemen as ever were 
seen in England, engaged themselves to enter into 
his service ; and here some of us formed ourselves 
into troops for the guard of his person. 

The king having been waited upon by the gentry 
of Yorkshire, and having told them his resolution of 
erecting his royal standard, and received from them 
hearty assurances of support, dismisses them, and 
marches to Hull, where lay the train of artillery, and 
all the arms and ammunition belonging to the 
northern army which had been disbanded. But 
here the Parliament had been beforehand with his 
Majesty, so that when he came to Hull, he found 
the gates shut, and Sir John Hotham, the governor, 
upon the walls, though with a great deed of seeming 
humility and protestations of loyalty to his person, 
[179] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

yet with a positive denial to admit any of the king^s 
attendants into the town. If his Majesty pleased to 
enter the town in person with any reasonable number 
of his household, he would submit, but would not 
be prevailed on to i*eceive the king as he would be 
received, with his forces, though those forces were 
then but very few. 

The king was exceedingly provoked at this repulse, 
and indeed it was a great surprise to us all, for 
certainly never prince began a war against the whole 
strength of his kingdom under the circumstances 
that he was in. He had not a garrison, or a com« 
pany of soldiers in his pay, not a stand of arms, or 
a barrel of powder, a musket, cannon or mortar, not 
a ship of all the fleet, or money in his treasury to 
procure them; whereas the Parliament had all his 
navy, and ordnance, stores, magazines, arms, am- 
munition, and revenue in their keeping. And this 
I take to be another defect of the king^s counsel, 
and a sad instance of the distraction of his affairs, 
that when he saw how all things were going to 
wreck, as it was impossible but he should see it, and 
^tis plain he did see it, that he should not long 
enough before it came to extremities secure the 
navy, magazines, and stores of war, in the hands of 
his trusty servants, that would have been sure to 
have preserved them for his use, at a time when he 
wanted them. 

It cannot be supposed but the gentry of England, 

who generally preserved their loyalty for their royal 

master, and at last heai*tily showed it, were exceed* 

ingly discouraged at first when they saw the Parlia- 

[180] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

ment had all the means of making war in their own 
hands, and the king was naked and destitute either 
of arms or ammunition, or money to procure them. 
Not but that the king, by extraoixiinary application, 
recovered the disorder the want of these things had 
thrown him into, and supplied himself with all 
things needful. 

But my observation was this, had his Majesty had 
the magazines, navy, and forts in his own hand, the 
gentry, who wanted but the prospect of something 
to encourage them, had come in at first, and the 
Parliament, being unprovided, would have been pres- 
ently reduced to reason. But this was it that baulked 
the gentry of Yorkshire, who went home again, giving 
the king good promises, but never appeared for him, 
till by raising a good army in Shropshire and Wales, 
he marched towards London, and they saw there 
was a prospect of their being supported. 

In this condition the king erected his standard at 
Nottingham, S2nd August 1642, and I confess^ I 
had very melancholy apprehensions of the king^s 
affairs, for the appearance to the royal standard was 
but small. The afiront the king had met with at 
Hull, had baulked and dispirited the northern gentry, 
and the king^s afiairs looked with a very dismal 
aspect We had expresses from London of the 
prodigious success of the Parliament's levies, how 
their men came in faster than they could entertain 
them, and that arms were delivered out to whole 
companies listed together, and the like. And all 
this while the king had not got together a thou- 
sand foot) and had no arms for them neither. When 
[181] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the king saw this, he immediately despatches five 
several messengers, whereof one went to the Marquis 
of Worcester into Wales ; one went to the queen, 
then at Windsor; one to the Duke of Newcastle, 
then Marquis of Newcastle, into the north; oi^e 
into Scotland ; and one into France, where the queen 
soon after arrived to raise money, and buy arms, and 
to get what assistance she could among her own 
friends. Nor was her Majesty idle, for she sent over 
several ships laden with arms and ammunition, with 
a fine train of artillery, and a great many very good 
officers; and though one of the first fell into the 
hands of the Parliament, with three hundred barrels 
of powder and some arms, and one hundred and 
fifty gentlemen, yet most of the gentlemen found 
means, one way or other, to get to us, and most of 
the ships the queen freighted arrived ; and at last 
her Majesty came herself, and brought an extraor- 
dinary supply both of men, money, arms, &amp;c., with 
which she joined the king^s forces under the Earl 
of Newcastle in the north. 

Finding his Majesty thus bestirring himself to 
muster his friends together, I asked him if he thought 
it might not be for his Majesty'^s service to let me go 
among my friends, and his loyal subjects about 
Shrewsbury ? " Yes,^ says the king, smiling, " I in- 
tend you shall, and I design to go with you myself. ^ 
I did not understand what the king meant then, and 
did not think it good manners to inquire, but the 
next day I found all things disposed for a march, 
and the king on horseback by eight of the clock ; 
when calling me to him, he told me I should go 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIEU 

before, and let my father and all my friends know 
he would be at Shrewsbury the Saturday following, 
I left my equipages, and taking post with only one 
servant, was at my father'^s the next morning by 
break of day. My father was not surprised at the 
news of the king^s coming at all, for, it seems, he, 
together with the loyal gentry of those parts, had 
sent particularly to give the king an invitation to 
move that way, which I was not made privy to, with 
an account what encouragement they had there in 
the endeavours made for his interest. In short, the 
whole country was entirely for the king, and such 
was the universal joy the people showed when the 
news of his Majesty'^s coming down was positively 
known, that all manner of business was laid aside, 
and the whole body of the people seemed to be 
resolved upon the war. 

As this gave a new face to the king^s affairs, so I 
must own it filled me with joy ; for I was astonished 
before, when I considered what the king and his 
friends were like to be exposed to. The news of the 
proceedings of the Parliament, and their powerful 
preparations, were now no more terrible ; the king 
came at the time appointed, and having lain at my 
father^s house one night, entered Shrewsbury in the 
morning. The acclamations of the people, the con- 
course of the nobility and gentry about his person, 
and the crowds which now came every day into his 
standard, were incredible. 

The loyalty of the English gentry was not only 
worth notice, but the power of the gentry is extraor- 
dinary visible in this matter. The king, in about 
[188] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

six weeks^ time, which was the most of his stay at 
Shrewsbury, was supplied with money, arms, ammuni- 
tion, and a train of artillery, and listed a body of an 
army upwards of 20,000 men. 

His Majesty seeing the general alacrity of his 
people, immediately issued out commissions, and 
formed regiments of horse and foot; and having 
some experienced officers about him, together with 
about sixteen who came fitim France, with a ship 
loaded with arms and some field-pieces which came 
very seasonably into the Severn, the men were exer- 
cised, regularly disciplined, and quartered, and now 
we began to look like soldiers. My father had raised 
a regiment of horse at his own charge, and completed 
them, and the king gave out arms to them from the 
supplies which I mentioned came from abroad. 
Another party of horse, all brave stout fellows, and 
well mounted, came in from Lancashire, and the Earl 
of Derby at the head of them. The Welshmen came 
in by droves; and so great was the concourse of 
people, that the king began to think of marching, 
and gave the command, as well as the trust of regu- 
lating the army, to the brave Earl of Lindsey, as 
general of the foot. The Parliament general being 
the Earl of Essex, two braver men, or two better 
officers, were not in the kingdom ; they had both 
been old soldiers, and had served together as volun- 
teers in the Low Country wars, under Prince Maurice. 
They had been comrades and companions abroad, 
and now came to face one another as enemies in the 
field. 

Such was the expedition used by the king and his 
[184] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

friends, in the levies of this first anny, that notwith- 
standing the wonderful expedition the Parliament 
made, the king was in the field before them; and 
now the gentry in other pfiu*ts of the nation bestirred 
themselves, and seized upon, and garrisoned several 
considerable places for the king. In the north, the 
Earl of Newcastle not only garrisoned the most con- 
siderable places, but even the general possession of 
the north was for the king, excepting Hull, and some 
few places, which the old Lord Fairfax had taken up 
for the Parliament. On the other hand, entii*e Corn- 
wall and most of the western counties were the king^s. 
The Parliament had their chief interest in the south 
and eastern part of England, as Kent, Surrey, and 
Sussex, Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, Bedford, 
Huntington, Hertford, Buckinghamshire, and the 
other midland counties. These were called, or some 
of them at least, the associated counties, and felt 
little of the war, other than the charges ; but the 
main support of the Parliament was the city of 
London. 

The king made the seat of his court at Oxford, 
which he caused to be regularly fortified. The Lord 
Say had been here, and had possession of the city for 
the enemy, and was debating about fortifying it, but 
came to no resolution, which was a very great over- 
sight in them ; the situation of the place, and the 
importance of it, on many accounts, to the city of 
London, considered ; and they would have retrieved 
this error afterwards, but then 't was too late ; for the 
king made it the headquarter, and received great 
supplies and assistance from the wealth of the colleges, 
[186] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

and the plenty of the neighbouring country. Abing- 
don, Wallingford, Basing, and Reading, weix^ all 
garrisoned and fortified as outworks to defend this as 
the centre. And thus all England became the theatre 
of blood, and war was spi*ead into every comer of the 
country, though as yet there was no stroke struck. 
I had no command in this army. My father led his 
own regiment, and, old as he was, would not leave his 
royal master, and my elder brother stayed at home 
to support the family. As for me, I rode a volunteer 
in the royal troop of guards, which may very well 
deserve the title of a royal troop, for it was composed 
of young gentlemen, sons of the nobility, and some 
of the prime gentry of the nation, and I think not a 
person of so mean a birth or fortune as myself. We 
reckoned in this troop two and thirty lords, or who 
came afterwards to be such, and eight and thirty of 
younger sons of the nobility, five French noblemen, 
and all the rest gentlemen of very good families and 
estates. 

And that I may give the due to their personal 
valour, many of this troop lived afterwards to have 
regiments and troops under their command in the 
service of the king, many of them lost their lives for 
him, and most of them their estates. Nor did they 
behave unworthy of themselves in their first showing 
their faces to the enemy, ais shall be mentioned in its 
place. 

While the king remained at Shrewsbury, his loyal 

friends bestirred themselves in several parts of the 

kingdom. Goring had secmred Portsmouth, but being 

young in matters of war, and not in time relieved, 

[186] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

though the Marquis of Hertford was marching to 
relieve him, yet he was obliged to quit the place, and 
shipped himself for Holland, from whence he returned 
with relief for the king, and afterwards did very good 
service upon all occasions, and so effectually cleared 
himself of the scandal the hasty surrender of Ports- 
mouth had brought upon his courage. 

The chief power of the king^s forces lay in three 
places, in Cornwall, in Yorkshire, and at Shrewsbury, 
In Cornwall, Sir Ralph Hopton, afterwards Lord 
Hopton, Sir Bevil Grenvile, and Sir Nicholas Slan- 
ning secured all the country, and afterwards spread 
themselves over Devonshire and Somersetshire, took 
Exeter from the Parliament, fortified Bridgewater 
and Barnstaple, and beat Sir William Waller at the 
battle of Roundway Down, as I shall touch at more 
particularly when I come to recite the part of my own 
travels that way. 

In the north, the Marquis of Newcastle secured all 
the country, garrisoned York, Scarborough, Carlisle, 
Newcastle, Pomfret, Leeds, and all the considerable 
places, and took the field with a very good army, 
though afterwards he proved more unsuccessful than 
the rest, having the whole power of a kingdom at his 
back, the Scots coming in with an army to the as- 
sistance of the Parliament, which, indeed, was the 
general tuni of the scale of the war ; for had it not 
been for this Scots army, the king had most certainly 
reduced the Parliament, at least to good terms of 
peace, in two years' time. 

The king was the third article. His force at Shrews- 
bury I have noted already. The alacrity of the gentry 
[187] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

filled him with hopes, and all his army with vigour, 
and the 8th of October 1642, his Majesty gave orders 
to march. The Earl of Essex had spent above a month 
after his leaving London (for he went thence the 9th 
of September) in modelling and drawing together 
his forces ; his rendezvous was at St. Albans, from 
whence he marched to Northampton, Coventry, and 
Warwick, and leaving garrisons in them, he comes 
on to Worcester. Being thus advanced, he pos- 
sesses Oxford, as I noted before, Banbury, Bristol, 
Gloucester, and Worcester, out of all which places, 
except Gloucester, we drove him back to London in 
a very little while. 

Sir John Byron had raised a very good party of 
600 horse, most gentlemen, for the king, and had 
possessed Oxford ; but on the approach of the Lord 
Say quitted it, being now but an open town, and 
retreated to Worcester, from whence, on the ap- 
proach of Essex^s army, he retreated to the king. 
And now all things grew ripe for action, both parties 
having secured their posts, and settled their schemes 
of the war, taken their posts and places as their 
measures and opportunities directed. The field was 
next in their eye, and the soldiers began to inquire 
when they should fight, for as yet there had been 
little or no blood drawn ; and 't was not long before 
they had enough of it ; for, I believe, I may challenge 
all the historians in Europe to tell me of any war in 
the world where, in the space of four years, there were 
so many pitched battles, sieges, fights, and skirmishes, 
as in this war. We never encamped or entrenched, 
never fortified the avenues to our posts, or lay fenced 
[188] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

with rivers and defiles ; here was no leaguers in the 
field, as at the story of Nuremberg, neither had our 
soldiers any tents, or what they call heavy baggage. 
TT was the general maxim of this war, " VJThere is the 
enemy ? let us go and fight them,^ or, on the other 
hand, if the enemy was coming, " What was to be 
done ? '^ " Why, what should be done ? Draw out 
into the fields and fight them."" I cannot say ^t was 
the prudence of the parties, and had the king fought 
less he had gained more. And I shall remark several 
times when the eagerness of fighting was the worst 
counsel, and proved our loss. This benefit, however, 
happened in general to the country, that it made a 
quick, though a bloody, end of the war, which other- 
wise had lasted till it might have ruined the whole 
nation. 

On the 10th of October the king^s army was in 
full march, his Majesty generalissimo, the Earl of 
Lindsey, general of the foot. Prince Rupert, general 
of the horse ; and the first action in the field was by 
Prince Rupert and Sir John Byron. Sir John had 
brought his body of 500 horse, as I noted already, 
from Oxford to Worcester; the Lord Say, with a 
strong party, being in the neighbourhood of Oxford, 
and expected in the town. Colonel Sandys, a hot 
man, and who had more courage than judgment, 
advances with about 1600 horse and dragoons, with 
design to beat Sir John Byron out of Worcester, 
and take post thci*e for the Parliament. 

The king had notice that the Earl of Essex 
designed for Worcester, and Prince Rupert was 
ordered to advance with a body of horse and 
[189] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

dragoons to face the enemy, and bring off Sir John 
Byron. This his Majesty did to amuse the Earl of 
Essex, that he might expect him that way; whereas 
the king^s design was to get between the Earl of 
Essex^s army and the city of London; and his 
Majesty^s end was doubly answered, for he not only 
drew Essex on to Worcester, where he spent more 
time than he needed, but he beat the party into the 
bargain. 

I went volunteer in this party, and rode in my 
father'^s regiment; for though we really expected 
not to see the enemy, yet I was tii*ed with lying still. 
We came to Worcester just as notice was brought 
to Sir John Byron, that a party of the enemy was 
on their march for Worcester, upon which the prince 
immediately consulting what was to be done, resolves 
to march the next morning and fight them. 

The enemy, who lay at Pershore, about eight 
miles from Worcester, and, as I believe, had no 
notice of our march, came on very confidently in the 
morning, and found us fairly drawn up to receive 
them. I must confess this was the bluntest, down- 
right way of making war that ever was seen. The 
enemy, who, in all the little knowledge I had of 
war, ought to have discovered our numbers, and 
guessed by our posture what our design was, might 
easily have informed themselves that we intended to 
attack them, and so might have secured the advan- 
tage of a bridge in their front ; but without any 
regard to these methods of policy, they came on at 
all hazards. Upon this notice, my father proposed 
to the prince to halt for them, and suffer ourselves 
[190] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

to be attacked, since we found them willing to give 
us the advantage. The prince approved of the ad- 
vice, so we halted within view of a bridge, leaving 
space enough on our front for about half the num- 
ber of their forces to pass and draw up ; and at the 
bridge was posted about fifty dragoons, with orders 
to retire as soon as the enemy advanced, as if they 
had been afraid. On the right of the road was a 
ditch, and a very high bank behind, where he had 
placed 300 dragoons, with orders to lie flat on their 
faces till the enemy had passed the bridge, and to let 
fly among them as soon as our trumpets sounded a 
charge. Nobody but Colonel Sandys would have 
been caught in such a snare, for he might easily 
have seen that when he was over the bridge there 
was not room enough for him to fight in. But the 
Lord of hosts was so much in their mouths, for that 
was the word for that day, that they took little heed 
how to conduct the host of the Lord to their own 
advantage. 

As we expected, they appeared, beat our dragoons 
from the bridge, and passed it. We stood firm in 
one line with a reserve, and expected a charge, but 
Colonel Sandys, showing a great deal more judgment 
than we thought he was master of, extends himself 
to the left, finding the ground too strait, and began 
to form his men with a great deal of readiness and 
skill, for by this time he saw our number was greater 
than he. expected. The prince perceiving it, and 
foreseeing that the stratagem of the dragoons would 
be frustrated by this, immediately charges with the 
horse, and the dragoons at the same time standing 
[191] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

upon their feet, poured in their shot upon those that 
were passing the bridge. This surprise put them 
into such disorder, that we had but little work with 
them. For though Colonel Sandys with the troops 
next him sustained the shock very well, and behaved 
themselves gallantly enough, yet the confusion be- 
ginning in their rear, those that had not yet passed 
the bridge were kept back by the fire of the dragoons, 
and the rest were easily cut in pieces. Colonel Sandys 
was mortally wounded and taken prisoner, and the 
crowd was so great to get back, that many pushed 
into the water, and were rather smothered than 
drowned. Some of them who never came into the 
fight, were so flighted, that they never looked behind 
them till they came to Pershore, and, as we were 
afterwards informed, the life-guards of the general 
who had quartered in the town, left it in disorder 
enough, expecting us at the heels of their men. 

If our business had been to keep the Parliament 
army from coming to Worcester, we had a very good 
opportunity to have secured the bridge at Pershore ; 
but our design lay another way, as I have said, and 
the king was for drawing Essex on to the Seveni, in 
hopes to get behind him, which fell out accordingly. 

Rssex, spurred by this affront in the infancy of 
their affairs, advances the next day, and came to 
Pershore time enough to be at the funeral of some of 
his men ; and from thence he advances to Worcester. 

We marched back to Worcester extremely pleased 

with the good success of our first attack, and our 

men were so flushed with this little victory that it 

put vigour into the whole army. The enemy lost 

[192] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

about 3000 men, and we carried away near 150 pris* 
oners, with 500 horses, some standards and arms, 
and among the prisoners their colonel ; but he died 
a little after of his wounds. 

Upon the approach of the enemy, Worcester was 
quitted, and the forces marched back to join the king^s 
army, which lay then at Bridgnorth, Ludlow, and 
thereabout. As the king expected, it fell out ; Essex 
found so much work at Worcester to settle Parlia- 
ment quarters, and secure Bristol, Gloucester, and 
Hereford, that it gave the king a full day^s march of 
him. So the king, having the start of him, moves 
towards London ; and Essex, nettled to be both 
beaten in fight and outdone in conduct, decamps^ 
and follows the king. 

The Parliament, and the Londoners too, were in a 
strange consternation at this mistake of their general ; 
and had the king, whose great misfortune was always 
to follow precipitant advices, — had the king, I say, 
pushed on his first design, which he had formed with 
very good reason, and for which he had been dodging 
with Essex eight or ten days, viz., of marching directly 
to London, where he had a very great interest, and 
where his friends were not yet oppressed and impov- 
erished, as they were afterwards, he had turned the 
scale of his affairs. And every man expected it; for 
the members began to shift for themselves, expresses 
were sent on the heels of one another to the Earl of 
Essex to hasten after the king, and, if possible, to 
bring him to a battle. Some of these lettera fell into 
our hands, and we might easily discover that the 
Parliament were in the last confusion at the thoughts 
13 [ 193 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

of our coining to London. Besides this, the city was 
in a worse fright than the House, and the great 
moving men began to go out of town. In short, 
they expected us, and we expected to come, but 
Providence for our ruin had otherwise determined it 
Essex, upon news of the king^s march, and upon 
receipt of the Parliaments letters, makes long 
marches after us, and on the SSrd of October reaches 
the village of Eineton, in Warwickshire. The king 
was almost as far as Banbury, and there calls a coun- 
cil of war. Some of the old officers that foresaw the 
advantage the king had, the concern the city was in, 
and the vast addition, both to the reputation of his 
forces and the increase of his interest, it would be if 
the king could gain that point, urged the king to 
march on to London. Prince Rupert and the fresh 
colonels pressed for fighting, told the king it dis- 
pirited their men to march with the enemy at their 
heels ; that the Parliament army was inferior to him 
by 6000 men, and fatigued with hasty marching ; 
that as their orders were to fight, he had nothing to 
do but to post himself to advantage, and receive 
them to their destruction ; that the action near 
Worcester had let them know how easy it was to 
deal with a rash enemy ; and that ^t was a dishonour 
for him, whose forces were so much superior, to be 
pursued by his subjects in rebellion. These and the 
like arguments prevailed with the king to alter his 
wiser measures and resolve to fight. Nor was this 
all ; when a resolution of fighting was taken, that 
part of the advice which they who were for fighting 
gave, as a reason for their opinion, was forgot, and 
[194] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

instead of halting and posting ourselves to advantage 
till the enemy came up, we were ordered to march 
back and meet them. 

Nay, so eager was the prince for fighting, that 
when, from the top of Edgehill, the enemy^s army 
was descried in the bottom between them and the 
village of Eineton, and that the enemy had bid us 
defiance, by discharging three cannons, we accepted 
the challenge, and answering with two shots from 
our army, we must needs forsake the advantages of 
the hills, which they must have mounted under the 
command of our cannon, and march down to them 
into the plain. I confess, I thought here was a great 
deal more gallantry than discretion ; for it was plainly 
taking an advantage out of our own hands, and put- 
ting it into the hands of the enemy. An enemy 
that must fight, may always be fought with to ad- 
vantage. My old hero, the glorious Gustavus Adol- 
phus, was as forward to fight as any man of true 
valour mixed with any policy need to be, or ought 
to be ; but he used to say, " An enemy reduced to 
a necessity of fighting, is half beaten.^ 

Tis true, we were all but young in the war; 
the soldiers hot and forward, and eagerly desired 
to come to hands with the enemy. But I take 
the more notice of it here, because the king in 
this acted against his own measures ; for it was 
the king himself had laid the design of getting 
the start of Essex, and marching to London. His 
friends had invited him thither, and expected him, 
and suffered deeply for the omission ; and yet he 
gave way to these hasty counsels, and suffered his 
[196] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

judgment to be overruled by majority of voices ; 
an error, I say, the Ejng of Sweden was never guilty 
of. For if all the officers at a council of war were of 
a different opinion, yet unless their reasons mastered 
his judgment, their votes never altered his measures. 
But this was the error of our good, but unfortunate 
master, three times in this war, and particularly in 
two of the greatest battles of the time, viz., this 
of Edgehill, and that of Naseby. 

The resolution for fighting being published in the 
army, gave an universal joy to the soldiers, who 
expressed an extraordinary ardour for fighting. 
I remember my father talking with me about it, 
asked me what I thought of the approaching battle. 
I told him I thought the king had done very well ; 
for at that time I did not consult the extent of the 
design, and had a mighty mind, like other rash 
people, to see it brought to a day, which made me 
answer my father as I did. " But,'' said I, " sir, I 
doubt there will be but indifierent doings on both 
sides, between two armies both made up of firesh 
men, that have never seen any service.'' My father 
minded little what I spoke of that; but when I 
seemed pleased that the king had resolved to fight, 
he looked angrily at me, and told me he was sorry I 
could see no farther into things. " I tell you," says 
he hastily, ^^ if the king should kill and take pris- 
oners this whole army, general and all, the Parlia- 
ment will have the victory ; for we have lost more 
by slipping this opportunity of getting into London, 
than we shall ever get by ten battles." I saw enough 
of this afterwards to convince me of the weight of 
[196] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

what my father said, and so did the king too ; but 
it was tiien too late. Advantages slipped in war 
are never recovered. 

We were now in a full march to fight the Earl of ■ 
Essex. It was on Sunday morning the S4th of Oc- 
tober 164S, fair weather overhead, but the ground 
very heavy and dirty. As soon as we came to the 
top of Edgehill, we discovered their whole army. 
They were not drawn up, having had two miles 
to march that morning, but they were very busy 
forming their lines, and posting the regiments as 
they came up. Some of their horse were exceedingly 
fatigued, having marched forty-eight hours together ; 
and had they been suffered to follow us three or 
four days^ march farther, several of their regiments 
of horse would have been quite ruined, and their 
foot would have been rendered unserviceable for 
the present. But we had no patience. 

As soon as our whole army was come to the top 
of the hill, we were drawn up in order of battle. 
The king's army made a very fine appearance ; and 
indeed they were a body of gallant men as ever ap- 
peared in the field, and as well furnished at all points ; 
the horse exceeding well accoutred, being most of 
them gentlemen and volunteers, some whole regi- 
ments serving without pay ; their hoi^es very good 
and fit for service as could be desired. The whole 
army were not above 18,000 men, and the enemy 
not 1000 over or under, though we had been told 
they were not above 1S,000 ; but they had been re- 
inforced with 4000 men from Northampton. The 
king was with the general, the Earl of Lindsey, in 
[197] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the main battle ; Prince Rupert commanded the 
right wing, and the Marquis of Hertford, the Lord 
Willoughby, and several other very good officers the 
left. 

The signa] of battle being given with two cannon 
shots, we marched in order of battalia down the hill, 
being drawn up in two lines with bodies of reserve ; 
the enemy advanced to meet us much in the same 
form, with this difference only, that they had placed 
their cannon on their right, and the king had placed 
ours in the centre, before, or rather between two 
great brigades of foot. Their cannon began with 
us first, and did some mischief among the dragoons 
of our left wing ; but our officers, perceiving the shot 
took the men and missed the horses, ordered all to 
alight, and every man leading his horse, to advance 
in the same order ; and this saved our men, for most 
of the enemy's shot flew over their heads. Our 
cannon made a terrible execution upon their foot 
for a quarter of an hour, and put them into great 
confusion, till the general obliged them to halt, and 
changed the posture of his front, marching round a 
small rising ground by which he avoided the fury of 
our artillery. 

By this time the wings were engaged, the king 
having given the signal of battle, and ordered the 
right wing to fall on. Prince Rupert, who, as is 
said, commanded that wing, fell on with such fury, 
and pushed the left wing of the Parliament army so 
effectually, that in a moment he filled all with ten*or 
and confusion. Commissary-General Ramsey, a 
Scotsman, a Low Country soldier, and an experienced 
[198] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

officer, commanded their left wing, and though he 
did all that an expert soldier, and a brave com- 
mander could do, yet ^t was to no purpose ; his lines 
were immediately broken, and all overwhelmed in a 
trice. Two regiments of foot, whether as part of 
the left wing, or on the left of the main body, I 
know not, were disordered by their own horse, and 
rather trampled to death by the hoi-ses, than beaten 
by our men ; but they were so entirely broken and 
disordered, that I do not remember that ever they 
made one volley upon our men ; for their own horse 
running away, and falling foul on these foot, were so 
vigorously followed by our men, that the foot never 
had a moment to rally or look behind them. The 
point of the left wing of horse were not so soon 
broken as the rest, and three regiments of them 
stood firm for some time. The dexterous officers of 
the other regiments taking the opportunity, rallied 
a great many of their scattered men behind them, 
and pieced in some troops with those regiments; 
but after two or three charges, which a brigade of 
our second line, following the prince, made upon 
them, they also were broken with the rest. 

I remember that at the great battle of Leipsic, the 
right wing of the Imperialists having fallen in upon 
the Saxons with like fury to this, bore down all 
before them, and beat the Saxons quite out of the 
field ; upon which the soldiers cried, " Victoria, let 
us follow." " No, no,'' said the old General Tilly, 
" let them go, but let us beat the Swedes too, and 
then all 's our own.'' Had Pi-ince Rupert taken this 
method, and instead of following the fugitives, who 
[199] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

were dispersed so effectually that two r^ments 
would have secured them from ralljring, — I say, had 
he fallen in upon the foot, or wheeled to the left, 
and fallen in upon the rear of the enemy^s right 
wing of horse, or returned to the assistance of the 
left wing of our horse, we had gained the most 
absolute and complete victory that could be ; nor 
had 1000 men of the enemy^s army got off. But 
this prince, who was full of fire, and pleased to see 
the rout of the enemy, pursued them quite to the 
town of Eineton, where indeed he killed abundance 
of their men, and some time also was lost in plunder- 
ing the baggage. 

But in the meantime, the glory and advantage of 
the day was lost to the king, for the right wing of 
the Parliament horse could not be so broken. Sir 
William Balfour made a desperate charge upon the 
point of the king's left, and had it not been for two 
regiments of dragoons who were planted in the 
reserve, had routed the whole wing, for he broke 
through the first line, and staggei-ed the second, 
who advanced to their assistance, but was so warmly 
received by those dragoons, who came seasonably 
in, and gave their first fire on horseback, that 
his fury was checked, and having lost a great many 
men, was forced to wheel about to his own men ; 
and had the king had but three regiments of horse 
at hand to have charged him, he had been routed. 
The rest of this wing kept their ground, and received 
the firat fury of the enemy with great firmness; 
after which, advancing in their turn, they were once 
masters of the Earl of Essex's cannon. And here we 
[200] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

lost another advantage ; for if any foot had been at 
hand to support these horse, they had carried off the 
cannon, or turned it upon the main battle of the 
enemy's foot, but the foot were otherwise engaged. 
The horse on this side fought with great obstinacy 
and variety of success a great while. Sir Philip 
Stapleton, who commanded the guards of the Earl 
of Essex, being engaged with a party of our Shrews- 
bury cavaliers, as we called them, was once in a fair 
way to have been cut off by a brigade of our foot, 
who, being advanced to fall on upon the Parlia- 
ment's main body, flanked Sir Philip's hoi*se in their 
way, and facing to the left, so furiously charged 
him with their pikes, that he was obliged to retire 
in great disorder, and with the loss of a great many 
men and horses. 

All this while the foot on both sides were des- 
perately engaged, and coming close up to the teeth 
of one another with the clubbed musket and push 
of pike, fought with gi^eat resolution, and a terrible 
slaughter on both sides, giving no quarter for a great 
while ; and they continued to do thus, till, as if they 
were tired, and out of wind, either party seemed 
willing enough to leave off, and take breath. Those 
which suffered most were that brigade which had 
charged Sir William Stapleton's horse, who being 
bravely engaged in the front with the enemy's foot, 
were, on the sudden, charged again in front and 
flank by Sir William Balfour's horse and disordered, 
after a very desperate defence. Here the king's 
standard was taken, the standard-bearer. Sir Edward 
Vemey, being killed; but it was rescued again by 
[201] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIJER 

Captain Smith, and brought to the king the same 
night, for which the king knighted the captain. 

This brigade of foot had fought all the day, and 
had not been broken at last, if any horse had been 
at hand to support them. The field began to be 
now clear ; both armies stood, as it were, gazing at 
one another, only the king, having rallied his foot, 
seemed inclined to renew the charge, and began to 
cannonade them, which they could not return, most 
of their cannon being nailed while they were in our 
possession, and all the cannoniers killed or fled ; and 
our gunners did execution upon Sir William Bal- 
four's troops for a good while. 

My father'^s regiment being in the right with the 
prince, I saw little of the fight but the rout of the 
enemy's left, and we had as full a victory there as we 
could desire, but spent too much time in it. We 
killed about 2000 men in that part of the action, 
and having totally dispersed them, and plundered 
their baggage, began to think of our fellows when 
't was too late to help them. We retunied, however, 
victorious to the king, just as the battle was over. 
The king asked the prince what news? He told 
him he could give his Majesty a good account of the 
enemy's horse. ** Ay, by G— d,** says a gentleman 
that stood by me, " and of their carts too." That 
word was spoken with such a sense of the misfortune, 
and made such an impression in the whole army, 
that it occasioned some ill blood afterwards among 
us ; and but that the king took up the business, it 
had been of ill consequence, for some person who 
had heard the gentleman speak it, informed the 
[202] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

prince who it was, and the prince resenting it, spoke 
something about it in the hearing of the party when 
the king was present. The gentleman, not at all 
surprised, told his Highness openly he had said the 
words ; and though he owned he had no disrespect 
for his Highness, yet he could not but say, if it had 
not been so, the enemy's army had been better 
beaten. The prince replied something very disoblige 
ing ; upon which the gentleman came up to the king, 
and kneeling, humbly besought his Majesty to ac- 
cept of his commission, and to give him leave to tell 
the prince, that whenever his Highness pleased, he 
was ready to give him satisfaction. The prince was 
exceedingly provoked, and as he was very passionate, 
began to talk very oddly, and without all govern- 
ment of himself. The gentleman, as bold as he, but 
niiuch calmer, preserved his temper, but maintained 
his quarrel; and the king was so concerned, that 
he was very much out of humour with the prince 
about it. However, his Majesty, upon considera- 
tion, soon ended the dispute, by laying his com- 
mands on them both to speak no more of it for that 
day ; and refusing the commission from the colonel, 
for he was no less, sent for them both next morning 
in private, and made them friends again. 

But to return to our story. We came back to the 
king timely enough to put the Earl of Essex's men 
out of all humour of renewing the fight, and as I 
observed before, both parties stood gazing at one 
another, and our cannon plajdng upon them obliged 
Sir William Balfour's horse to wheel off in some dis- 
order, but they returned us none again, which, as we 
[203] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

afterwards understood, was, as I said before, for want 
of both powder and gunners, for the cannoniers and 
firemen were killed, or had quitted their train in the 
fight, when our horse had possession of their artillery ; 
and as they had spiked up some of the cannon, so they 
had carried away fifteen carriages of powder. 

Night coming on, ended all discourse of more fight- 
ing, and the king drew off and marched towards the 
hills. I know no other token of victory which the 
enemy had than their lying in the field of battle all 
night, which they did for no other reason than that, 
having lost their baggage and provisions, they had 
nowhere to go, and which we did not, because we had 
good quarters at hand. 

The number of prisoners and of the slain were not 
very unequal ; the enemy lost more men, we most of 
quality. Six thousand men on both sides were killed 
on the spot, whereof, when our rolls were examined, 
we missed ^00. We lost our brave general the old 
Earl of Lindsey, who was wounded and taken prisoner, 
and died of his wounds ; Sir Edward Stradling, Col- 
onel Lundsfoi*d, prisoners ; and Sir Edward Vemey 
and a great many gentlemen of quality slain. On 
the other hand, we carried off Colonel Essex, Colonel 
Ramsey, and the Lord St. John, who also died of his 
wounds; we took five ammunition waggons full of 
powder, and brought off about 600 horse in the 
defeat of the left wing, with eighteen standards and 
colours, and lost seventeen. 

The slaughter of the left wing was so great, and 
the flight so effectual, that several of the officers rid 
dear away, coasting round, and got to London, where 
[204] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

they reported that the Parliament army was entirely 
defeated — all lost, killed, or taken, as if none but 
them were left alive to carry the news. This filled 
them with consternation for a while, but when other 
messengers followed, all was restored to quiet again, 
and the Parliament cried up their victory and suf- 
ficiently mocked God and their general with their 
public thanks for it. Truly, as the fight was a de- 
liverance to them, they were in the right to give 
thanks for it ; but as to its being a victory, neither 
side had much to boast of, and they less a great deal 
than we had. 

I got no hurt in this fight, and indeed we of the 
right wing had but little fighting ; I think I had dis- 
charged my pistols but once, and my carabine twice, 
for we had more fatigue than fight ; the enemy fled, 
and we had little to do but to follow and kill those 
we could overtake. I spoiled a good horse, and got 
a better from the enemy in his room, and came home 
weary enough. My father lost his horse, and in the 
fall was bmised in his thigh by another horse tread- 
ing on him, which disabled him for some time, and 
at his request, by his Majesty'^s consent, I commanded 
the regiment in his absence. 

The enemy received a recruit of 4000 men the next 
morning ; if they had not, I believe they had gone 
back towards Worcester; but, encouraged by that 
reinforcement, they called a council of war, and had 
a long debate whether they could attack us again ; 
but notwithstfuiding their great victory, they durst 
not attempt it, though this addition of strength 
made them superior to us by 3000 men. 
[ 205 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

The king indeed expected, that when these troops 
joined them they would advance, and we were pre- 
paring to receive them at a village called Aynho, 
where the headquarters continued three or four days ; 
and had they really esteemed the first day^s work a 
victory, as they called it, they would have done it, 
but they thought not good to venture, but march 
away to Warwick, and from thence to Coventry, 
The king, to urge them to venture upon him, and 
come to a second battle, sits down before Banbury, 
and takes both town and castle; and two entire 
regiments of foot, and one troop of horse, quit the 
Parliament service, and take up their arms for the 
king. This was done almost before their faces, which 
was a better proof of a victory on our side, than any 
they could pretend to. Prom Banbury we marched 
to Oxford ; and now all men saw the Parliament had 
made a great mistake, for they were not always in 
the right any more than we, to leave Oxford without 
a garrison. The king caused new regular works to 
be drawn round it, and seven royal bastions with 
ravelins and out-works, a double ditch, counterscarp, 
and covered way ; all which, added to the advantage 
of the situation, made it a formidable place, and from 
this time it became our place of arms, and the centre 
of affairs on the king^s side. 

If the Parliament had the honour of the field, the 
king reaped the fmits of the victory ; for all this part 
of the country submitted to him. E^ssex^s army made 
the best of their way to London, and were but in an 
ill condition when they came there, especially their 
horse. 

[S06] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

The Parliament, sensible of this, and receiving daily 
accounts of the progress we made, began to cool a 
little in their temper, abated of their first rage, and 
voted an address for peace ; and sent to the king to let 
him know they were desirous to prevent the effusion 
of more blood, and to bring things to an accommo- 
dation, or, as they called it, a right understanding. 

I was now, by the king^s particular favour, sum- 
moned to the councils of war, my father continuing 
absent and ill ; and now I began to think of the real 
grounds, and which was more, of the fatal issue of 
this war. I say, I now began it ; for I cannot say 
that I ever rightly stated matters in my own mind 
before, though I had been enough used to blood, 
and to see the destruction of people, sacking of 
towns, and plundering the country ; yet 't was in 
Germany, and among strangers ; but I found a strange 
secret and unaccountable sadness upon my spirits, to 
see this acting in my own native country. It grieved 
me to the heart, even in the rout of our enemies, to 
see the slaughter of them ; and even in the fight, 
to hear a man cry for quarter in English, moved me 
to a compassion which I had never been used to; 
nay, sometimes it looked to me as if some of my own 
men had been beaten ; and when I heard a soldier 
cry, " O God, I am shot,'' I looked behind me to see 
which of my own troop was fallen. Here I saw 
myself at the cutting of the throats of my friends ; 
and indeed some of my near relations. My old com- 
rades and fellow-soldiers in Germany were some with 
us, some against us, as their opinions happened to 
differ in religion. For my part, I confess I had not 
[207] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

much religion in me, at that time ; but I thought 
religion rightly practised on both sides would have 
made us all better friends ; and therefore sometimes 
I began to think, that both the bishops of our side, 
and the preachers on theirs, made religion rather the 
pretence than the cause of the war. And from those 
thoughts I vigorously argued it at the council of war 
against marching to Brentford, while the address for 
a treaty of peace from the Parliament was in hand ; 
for I was for taking the Parliament by the handle 
which they had given us, and entering into a nego- 
tiation, with the advantage of its being at their 
own request. 

I thought the king had now in his hands an op- 
portunity to make an honourable peace; for this 
battle of Edgehill, as much as they boasted of 
the victoiy to hearten up their friends, had sorely 
weakened their army, and discouraged their party 
too, which in effect was worse as to their army. The 
horse were particularly in an ill case, and the foot 
greatly diminished, and the remainder very sickly ; 
but besides this, the Parliament were greatly alarmed 
at the progress we made afterward ; and still fearing 
the king^s surprising them, had sent for the Earl of 
Essex to London, to defend them ; by which the 
country was, as it were, defeated and abandoned, 
and left to be plundered; our parties over-run all 
places of pleasure. All this while I considered, that 
whatever the soldiers of fortune meant by the war, 
our desires were to suppress the exorbitant power of 
a party, to establish our king in his just and legal 
rights ; but not with a design to destroy the con« 
[808] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

stitution of government and the being of Parliament. 
And therefore I thought now was the time for 
peace, and there were a great many worthy gentle- 
men in the army of my mind ; and, had our master 
had ears to hear us, the war might have had an end 
here. 

This address for peace was received by the king 
at Maidenhead, whither his army was now advanced, 
and his Majesty returned answer by Sir Peter KiUe- 
grew, that he desired nothing more, and would not 
be wanting on his part. Upon this the Parliament 
name commissioners, and his Majesty excepting 
against Sir John Evelyn, they left him out, and sent 
others ; and desired the king to appoint his residence 
near London, where the commissioners might wait 
upon him. Accordingly the king appointed Windsor 
for the place of treaty, and desired the treaty might 
be hastened. And thus all things looked with a 
favourable aspect, when one unlucky action knocked 
it all on the head, and filled both parties with more 
implacable animosities than they had before, and all 
hopes of peace vanished. During this progress of 
the king^s armies, we were always abroad with the 
horse ravaging the country, and plundering the 
Roundheads. Prince Rupert, a most active vigilant 
party man, and I must own, fitter for such than for 
a general, was never lying still, and I seldom stayed 
behind ; for our regiment being very well mounted, 
he would always send for us, if he had any extraor- 
dinary design in hand. 

One time in particular he had a design upon 
Aylesbury, the capital of Buckinghamshire ; indeed 
1* [ 209 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

our view at first was rather to beat the enemy out of 
town and demolish their works, and perhaps raise 
some contributions on the rich country round it, 
than to garrison the place, and keep it; for we 
wanted no more garrisons, being masters of the field. 

The prince had 2600 horse with him in this expe- 
dition, but no foot ; the town had some foot raised 
in the country by Mr. Hampden, and two regiments 
of country militia, whom we made light of, but we 
found they stood to their tackle better than well 
enough. We^ came very early to the town, and 
thought they had no notice of us ; but some false 
brother had given them the alarm, and we found them 
all in arms, the hedges without the town lined with 
musketeei's, on that side in particular where they 
expected us, and two regiments of foot drawn up in 
view to support tliem, with some horse in the rear 
of all. 

The prince, willing, however, to do something, 
caused some of his horse to alight, and serve as dra- 
goons ; and having broken a way into the enclosures, 
the horse beat the foot from behind the hedges, 
while the rest who were alighted charged them in the 
lane which leads to the town. Here they had cast 
up some works, and fired from their lines very regu- 
larly, considering them as militia only, the governor 
encouraging them by his example ; so that finding 
without some foot there would be no good to be 
done, we gave it over, and drew off; and so Aylesbury 
escaped a scouring for that time. 

I cannot deny but these flying parties of horse 
committed great spoil among the country people; 
I 210 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

and sometimes the prince gave a liberty to some 
ci-uelties which were not at all for the king^s interest ; 
because it being still upon our own country, and the 
king^s own subjects, whom in all his declarations he 
protested to be careful of, it seemed to contradict all 
those protestations and declarations, and served to 
aggravate and exasperate the common people ; and 
the king^s enemies made all the advantages of it that 
was possible, by crying out of twice as many extrava- 
gancies as were committed. 

'Tis true, the king, who naturally abhorred such 
things, could not i-estrain his men, no, nor his 
generals, so absolutely as he would have done. The 
war, on his side, was very much i la volunteer ; many 
gentlemen served him at their own charge, and some 
paid whole regiments themselves : sometimes also the 
king^s affairs were straiter than ordinary, and his 
men were not very well paid, and this obliged him to 
wink at their excursions upon the country, though 
he did not approve of them. And yet I must own, 
that in those parts of England where the war was 
hottest, there never was seen that ruin and depopu- 
lation, murders, ravishments, and barbarities, which 
I have seen even among Protestant armies abroad, in 
Grermany and other foreign parts of the world. And 
if the Parliament people had seen those things abroad, 
as I had, they would not have complained. 

The most I have seen was plundering the towns 
for provisions, drinking up their beer, and turning 
our hoi^ses into their fields, or stacks of com ; and 
sometimes the soldiers would be a little rude with the 
wenches ; but alas ! what was this to Count Tilly^s 
[211] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

ravages in Saxony? Or what was our taking of 
Leicester by storm, where they cried out of our bar- 
barities, to the sacking of New Brandenburg, or the 
taking of Magdeburg ? In Leicester, of 7000 or 
8000 people in the town, 800 were killed ; in Mag- 
deburg, of 25,000 scarce 2700 were left, and the 
whole town burnt to ashes. I myself have seen 
seventeen or eighteen villages on fire in a day, and 
the people driven away from their dwellings, like 
herds of cattle; the men murdered, the women 
stripped ; and 700 or 800 of them together, after 
they had suffered all the indignities and abuses of 
the soldiers, driven stark naked in the winter through 
the great towns, to seek shelter and relief from the 
charity of their enemies. I do not instance these 
greater barbarities to justify lesser actions, which are 
nevertheless irregular; but I do say, that circum- 
stances considered, this war was managed with as 
much humanity on both sides as could be expected, 
especially also considering the animosity of parties. 

But to return to the prince : he had not always the 
same success in these enterprises, for sometimes we 
came short home. And I cannot omit one pleasant 
adventure which happened to a party of ours, in one 
of these excursions into Buckinghamshire. The 
major of our regiment was soundly beaten by a party, 
which, as I may say, was led by a woman ; and, if I 
hfiul not rescued him, I know not but he had been 
taken prisoner by a woman. It seems our men had 
besieged some fortified house about Oxfordshire, 
towards Thame, and the house being defended by 
the lady in her husband^s absence, she had yielded 
[212] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the house upon a capitulation ; one of the articles of 
which was, to march out with all her servants, 
soldiers, and goods, and to be conveyed to Thame. 
Whether she thought to have gone no farther, or 
that she reckoned herself safe there, I know not ; but 
my major, with two troops of horse, meets with this 
lady and her party, about five miles from Thame, as 
we were coming back from our defeated attack of 
Aylesbury. We reckoned ourselves in an enemy's 
country, and had lived a little at large, or at discre- 
tion, as 't is called abroad ; and these two troops, 
with the major, were returning to our detachment 
from a little village, where, at the farmer^s house, they 
had met with some liquor, and truly some of his men 
were so drunk they could but just sit upon their 
horses. The major himself was not much better, 
and the whole body were but in a sorry condition to 
fight. Upon the road they meet this party ; the lady 
having no design of fighting, and being, as she 
thought, under the protection of the articles, sounds 
a parley, and desired to speak with the officer. The 
major, as drunk as he was, could tell her, that by the 
articles she was to be assured no farther than Thame, 
and being now five miles beyond it, she was a fair 
enemy, and therefore demanded to render themselves 
prisoners. The lady seemed surprised, but being 
sensible she was in the wrong, ofTei^ed to compound 
for her goods, and would have given him «f 300, and 
I think seven or eight horses. The major would 
certainly have taken it, if he had not been drunk ; 
but he refused it, and gave threatening words to her, 
blustering in language which he thought proper to 
[ 213 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

fright a woman, viz., that he would cut them all to 
pieces, and give no quarter, and the like. 

The lady, who had been more used to the smell of 
powder than he imagined, called some of her servants 
to her, and, consulting with them what to do, they 
all unanimously encouraged her to let them fight ; 
told her it was plain that the commander was 
drunk, and all that were with him were rather worse 
than he, and hardly able to sit their horses, and 
that therefore one bold charge would put them all 
into confusion. In a word, she consented, and, as 
she was a woman, they desired her to secure herself 
among the waggons ; but she refused, and told them 
bravely she would take her fate with them. In 
short, she boldly bade my major defiance, and that 
he might do his worst, since she had offered him 
fair, and he had refused it ; her mind was altered 
now, and she would give him nothing, and bade his 
officer that parleyed longer with her be gone ; so 
the parley ended. After this she gave him fair 
leave to go back to his men ; but before he could 
tell his tale to them she was at his heels with all her 
men, and gave him such a home charge as put his 
men into disoixler, and, being too drunk to rally, 
they were knocked down befoi-e they knew what to 
do with themselves, and in a few minutes more they 
took to a plain flight. But what was still worse, 
the men, being some of them very drunk, when they 
came to run for their lives fell over one another, and 
tumbled over their horses, and made such work that 
a troop of women might have beaten them all. In 
this pickle, with the enemy at his heels, I camie in 
[214] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

with him, hearing the noise. When I appeared the 
pursuers retreated, and, seeing what a condition my 
people were in, and not knowing the strength of the 
enemy, I contented myself with bringing them off 
without pursuing the other ; nor could I ever hear 
positively who this female captain was. We lost 
seventeen or eighteen of our men, and about thirty 
horses; but when the particulars of the story was 
told us, our major was so laughed at by the whole 
army, and laughed at everywhere, that he was 
ashamed to show himself for a week or a fortnight 
after. 

But to return to the king : his Majesty, as I 
observed, was at Maidenhead addressed by the Parlia- 
ment for peace, and Windsor being appointed for 
the place of treaty, the van of his aj:my lay at Cole- 
brook. In the meantime, whether it were true or 
only a pretence, but it was reported the Parliament 
general had sent a body of his troops, with a train 
of artillery, to Hammersmith, in order to fall upon 
some part of our ai^my, or to take some advanced 
post, which was to the prejudice of our men ; where- . 
upon the king ordered the army to march, and, by 
the favour of a thick mist, came within half a mile 
of Brentford before he was discovered. There were 
two regiments of foot, and about 600 horse into the 
town, of the enemy's best troops ; these taking the 
alarm, posted themselves on the bridge at the west 
end of the town. The king attacked them with a 
select detachment of his best infantry, and they de- 
fended themselves with incredible obstinacy. I must 
own I never saw raw men, for they could not have 
[216] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

been in arms above four months, act like them in 
my life. In short, there was no forcing these men, 
for, though two whole brigades of our foot, backed 
by our horse, made five several attacks upon them 
they could not break them, and we lost a great many 
brave men in that action. At last, seeing the ob* 
stinacy of these men, a party of horse was ordered to 
go round from Osterley ; and, entering the town on 
the north side, where, though the horse made some 
resistance, it was not considerable, the town was 
presently taken. I led my regiment through an 
enclosure, and came into the town nearer to the 
bridge than the rest, by which means I got first into 
the town ; but I had this loss by my expedition, 
that the foot charged me before the body was come 
up, and poured in their shot very furiously. My 
men were but in an ill case, and would not have 
stood much longer, if the rest of the horse coming 
up the lane had not found them other employment. 
When the horse were thus entered, they immediately 
dispersed the enemy'^s horse, who fled away towards 
London, and falling in sword in hand upon the rear 
of the foot, who were engaged at the bridge, they 
were all cut in pieces, except about 200, who, scorn- 
ing to ask quarter, desperately threw themselves into 
the river of Thames, where they were most of them 
drowned. 

The Parliament and their party made a great out- 
cry at this attempt — that it was base and treacher- 
ous while in a treaty of peace ; and that the king, 
having amused them with hearkening to a treaty, 
designed to have seized upon their train of artillery 
[216] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

first, and, after that, to have surprised both the city 
of London and the Parliament. And I have observed 
since, that our historians note this action as con- 
trary to the laws of honour and treaties, though as 
there was no cessation of arms agreed on, nothing is 
more contrary to the laws of war than to suggest it. 
That it was a very unhappy thing to the king and 
whole nation, as it broke off the hopes of peace, and 
v/as the occasion of bringing the Scots army in upon 
us, I readily acknowledge, but that there was any- 
thing dishonourable in it, I cannot allow. For though 
the Parliament had addressed to the king for peace, 
and such steps were taken in it as before, yet, as I 
have said, there was no proposals made on either 
side for a cessation of arms, and all the world must 
allow, that in such cases the war goes on in the 
field, while the peace goes on in the cabinet. And 
if the war goes on, admit the king had designed 
to surprise the city or Parliament, or all of them, 
it had been no more than the custom of war allows, 
and what they would have done by him if they 
could. The treaty of WestphaUa, or peace of Mun- 
ster, which ended the bloody wars of Germany, 
was a precedent for this. That treaty was actually 
negotiating seven years, and yet the war went on 
with all the vigour and rancour imaginable, even to 
the last. Nay, the very time after the conclusion 
of it, but before the news could be brought to the 
army, did he that was afterwards King of Sweden, 
Carolus Gustavus, take the city of Prague by surprise, 
and therein an inestimable booty. Besides, all the 
wars of Europe are full of examples of this kind, 
[217] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

and therefore I cannot see any reason to blame the 
king for this action as to the fairness of it. Indeed, 
as to the policy of it, I can say little ; but the case 
was this. The king had a gallant army, flushed with 
success, and things hitherto hcul gone on very pros* 
perously, both with his own army and elsewhere ; he 
hfiul above 35,000 men in his own army, including 
his garrisons left at Banbury, Shrewsbury, Worcester, 
Oxford, Wallingford, Abingdon, Reculing, and places 
adjacent. On the other hand, the Parliament army 
came back to London in but a very sorry condition ; ^ 
for what with their loss in their victory, as they 
called it, at Edgehill, their sickness, and a hasty 
march to London, they were very much diminished, 
though at London they soon recruited them again. 
And this prosperity of the king's affairs might en- 
courage him to strike this blow, thinking to bring 
the Parliament to the better terms by the appre- 
hensions of the superior strength of the king's 
forces. 

But, however it was, the success did not equally 
answer the king's expectation. The vigorous defence 
the troops posted at Brentford made as above, gave 
the Earl of Essex opportunity, with extraoixlinary 
application, to draw his forces out to Turnham 
Green. And the exceeding alacrity of the enemy 
was such, that their whole army appeared with them, 
making together an army of S4,000 men, drawn 
up in view of our forces by eight o'clock the next 

1 General Ludlow, in his Memoirs, p. 52, says their men re- 
turned from Warwick to London, not like men who had obtained 
a victory, but like men that had been beaten. : 
[218] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

morning. The city regiments were placed between 
the regular troops, and all together offered us battle, 
but we were not in a condition to accept it. The king 
indeed was sometimes of the mind to charge them, 
and once or twice ordered parties to advance to be- 
gin to skirmish, but upon better advice altered 
his mind, and indeed it was the wisest counsel to 
defer the fighting at that time. The Parliament 
generals were as unfixed in their resolutions, on 
the other side, as the king; sometimes they sent 
out parties, and then called them back again. One 
strong party of near 3000 men marched off towards 
Acton, with orders to amuse us on that side, but 
were countermanded. Indeed, I was of the opinion 
we might have ventured the battle, for though the 
Parliament's army were more numerous, yet the city 
trained bands, which made up 4000 of their foot, 
were not much esteemed, and the king was a great 
deal stronger in horse than they. But the main 
reason that hindered the engagement, was want of 
ammunition, which the king having duly weighed, 
he caused the carriages and cannon to draw off first, 
and then the foot, the horse continuing to face the 
enemy till all was clear gone ; and then we drew off 
too and marched to Kingston, and the next day 
to Reading. 

Now the king saw his mistake in not continuing 
his march for London, instead of facing about to 
fight the enemy at Edgehill. And all the honour 
we had gained in so matiy successful enterprises lay 
buried in this shameful retreat from an army of 
citizens' wives ; for truly that appearance at Tum- 
[ 219 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

ham Green was gay, but not great. There was as 
many lookers-on as actors. The crowds of ladies, 
apprentices, and mob was so great, that when the 
parties of our army advanced, and, as they thought, 
to charge, the coaches, horsemen, and crowd, that 
cluttered away to be out of harm^s way, looked little 
better than a rout. And I was persuaded a good 
home charge from our horse would have sent their 
whole army after them. But so it was, that this 
crowd of an army was to triumph over us, and they 
did it, for all the kingdom was carefully informed 
how their dreadful looks had frightened us away. 

Upon our retreat, the Parliament resent this attack, 
which they call treacherous, and vote no accommo- 
dation ; but they considered of it afterwards, and 
sent six commissioners to the king with propositions. 
But the change of the scene of action changed the 
terms of peace, and now they made terms like con- 
querors, petition him to desert his army, and return 
to the Parliament, and the like. Had his Majesty, 
at the head of his army, with the full reputation 
they had before, and in the ebb of their affairs, 
rested at Windsor, and commenced a treaty, they 
had certainly made more reasonable proposals ; but 
now the scabbard seemed to be thrown away on both 
sides. 

The rest of the winter was spent in strengthening 
parties and places, also in fruitless treaties of peace, 
messages, remonstrances, and paper war on both 
sides, and no action remarkable happened anywhere 
that I remember. Yet the king gained ground 
everywhere, and his forces in the north increased 
[220] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

under the Earl of Newcastle ; also my Lord Goring, 
then only called Colonel Goring, arrived from Hol- 
land, bringing three ships laden with arms and 
ammunition, and notice that the queen was following 
with more. Goring brought 4000 barrels of gun- 
powder, and 20,000 small arms ; all which came very 
seasonably, for the king was in great want of them, 
especially the powder. Upon this recruit the Earl 
of Newcastle dmws down to York, and being above 
16,000 strong, made Sir Thomas Fairfax give ground, 
and retreat to Hull. 

Whoever lay still. Prince Rupert was always 
abroad, and I chose to go out with his Highness as 
often as I had opportunity, for hitherto he was 
always successful. About this time the prince being 
at Oxford, I gave him intelligence of a party of the 
enemy who lived a little at large, too much for good 
soldiers, about Cirencester. The prince, glad of the 
news, resolved to attack them, and though it was a 
wet season, and the ways exceeding bad, being in 
February, yet we marched all night in the dark, 
which occasioned the loss of some horses and men 
too, in sloughs and holes, which the darkness of the 
night had suffered them to fall into. We were a 
very strong pai*ty, being about 3000 horse and dra- 
goons, and coming to Cirencester very early in the 
morning, to our great satisfaction the enemy were 
perfectly surprised, not having the least notice of our 
march, which answered our end more ways than one. 
However, the Earl of Stamford's regiment made 
some resistance ; but the town having no works to 
defend it, saving a slight breastwork at the entrance 
[221] 



Digitized by 



Google 



' MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

of the road, with a turnpike, our dragoons alighted, 
and forcing their way over the bellies of Stamford^s 
foot, they beat them from their defence, and fol- 
lowed them at their heels into the town. Stamford^s 
regiment was entirely cut in pieces, and several 
others, to the number of about 800 men, and the 
town entered without any other resistance. We 
took 1^00 prisoners, SOOO arms, and the county 
magazine, which at that time was considerable ; for 
there was about 120 barrels of powder, and all things 
in proportion. 

I received the first hurt I got in this war at this 
action, for having followed the dragoons and brought 
my regiment within the barricado which they had 
gained, a musket bullet struck my horse just in the 
head, and that so effectually that he fell down as 
dead as a stone all at once. The fall plunged me 
into a puddle of water and daubed me ; and my man 
having brought me another horse and cleaned me a 
little, I was just getting up, when another bullet 
struck me on my left band, which I had just clapped 
on the horse^s mane to lift myself into the saddle. 
The blow broke one of my fingers, and bruised my 
hand very much ; and it proved a very painful hurt 
to me. For the present I did not much concern 
myself about it, but made my man tie it up close in 
my handkerchief, and led up my men to the market- 
place, where we had a very smart brush with some 
musketeers who were posted in the churchyard ; but 
our dragoons soon beat them out there, and the 
whole town was then our own. We mcule no stay 
here, but marched back with all our booty to Oxford, 
[222] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

for we knew the enemy were very strong at Gloucester, 
and that way. 

Much about the same time, the Earl of Northamp- 
ton, with a strong party, set upon Lichfield, and took 
the town, but could not take the Close ; but they 
beat a body of 4000 men coming to the relief of the 
town, under Sir John Gell, of Derbyshire, and Sir 
William Brereton, of Cheshire, and killing 600 of 
them, dispersed the rest. 

Our second campaign now began to open ; the 
king marched from Oxford to relieve Reading, which 
was besieged by the Parliament forces ; but Colonel 
Fielding, Lieutenant-Governor, Sir Arthur Ashton 
being wounded, surrendered to Essex before the king 
could come up ; for which he was tried by martial 
law, and condemned to die, but the king forebore to 
execute the sentence. This was the first town we 
had lost in the war, for still the success of the king'^s 
affairs was very encouraging. This bad news, how- 
ever, was overbalanced by an account brought the 
king at the same time, by an express from York, 
that the queen had landed in the north, and had 
brought over a great magazine of arms and ammuni- 
tion, besides some men. Some time after this her 
Majesty, marching southward to meet the king, 
joined the army near Edgehill, where the first battle 
was fought She brought the king 3000 foot, 1600 
horse and dragoons, six pieces of cannon, 1500 barrels 
of powder, 12,000 small arms. 

During this prosperity of the king'^s affairs his 
armies increased mightily in the western counties 
also. Sir William Waller, indeed, commanded for 
[223] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the Parliament in those parts too, and particularly 
in Dorsetshire, Hamsphire, and Berkshire, where he 
carried on their cause but too fast; but farther 
west, Sir Nicholas Slanning, Sir Ralph Hopton, and 
Sir Bevil Grenvile had extended the king^s quarters 
from Cornwall through Devonshire, and into Somer- 
setshire, where they took Exeter, Barnstaple, and 
Bideford ; and the first of these they fortified very 
well, making it a place of arms for the west, and 
afterwards it was the residence of the queen. 

At last, the famous Sir William Waller and the 
king^s forces met, and came to a pitched battle, 
where Sir William lost all his honour again. This 
was at Roundway Down in Wiltshire. Waller had 
engaged our Cornish army at Lansdown, and in a 
very obstinate fight had the better of them, and 
made them retreat to the Devizes. Sir William 
Hopton, however, having a good body of foot un- 
touched, sent expi*esses and messengers one in the 
neck of another to the king for some horse, and the 
king being in great concern for that army, who were 
composed of the flower of the Cornish men, com- 
manded me to march with all possible secrecy, as 
well as expedition, with ISOO horse and dragoons 
from Oxford, to join them. We set out in the 
depth of the night, to avoid, if possible, any intelli- 
gence being given of our route, and soon joined with 
the Cornish army, when it was as soon resolved to 
give battle to Waller ; and give him his due, he was 
as forward to fight as we. As it is easy to meet 
when both sides are willing to be found, Sir William 
Waller met us upon Roundway Down, where we had 
[284] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

a fair field on both sides, and room enough to draw 
up our horse. In a word, there was little ceremony 
to the work ; the armies joined, and we charged his 
horse with so much resolution, that thej quickly 
fled, and quitted the field ; for we over-matched him 
in horse, and this was the entire destruction of their 
army. For their infantry, which outnumbered ours 
by 1600, were now at our mercy ; some faint resist- 
ance they made, just enough to give us occasion 
to bi*eak into their ranks with our horse, where we 
gave time to our foot to defeat others that stood 
to their work, upon which they began to disband, 
and run every way they could ; but our horse 
having surrounded them, we mcule a fearful havoc 
of them. 

We lost not above 200 men in this action ; Waller 
lost above 4000 ^killed and taken, and as many dis- 
persed that never returned to their colours. Those 
of foot that escaped got into Bristol, and Waller, 
with the poor remains of his routed regiments, got 
to London ; so that it is plain some ran east, and 
some ran west, that is to say, they fled every way 
they could. 

My going with this detachment prevented my 
being at the siege of Bristol, which Prince Rupert 
attacked much about the same time, and it surren- 
dered in three days. The Parliament questioned 
Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes, the governor, and had 
him tried as a coward by a court-martial, and con- 
demned to die, but suspended the execution also, as 
the king did the governor of Reading. I have often 
heard Prince Rupert say, they did Colonel Fiennes 
1^ [225] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

wrong in that affair ; and that if the colonel would 
have summoned him, he would have demanded a 
passport of the Parliament, and have come up and 
convinced the court that Colonel Fiennes had not 
misbehaved himself, and that he had not a sufficient 
garrison to defend a city of that extent ; having not 
above ISOO men in the town, excepting some of 
Waller^s runaways, most of whom were unfit for ser- 
vice, and without arms ; and that the citizens in 
general being disaffected to him, and ready on the 
first occasion to open the gates to the king^s forces, 
it was impossible for him to have kept the city. 
**And when I hcui farther informed them,'' said 
the prince, ^^of the measures I had taken for a 
genei^al assault the next day, I am confident I should 
have convinced them that I had taken the city by 
storm, if he had not surrendered." 

The king's affairs were now in a very good posture, 
and three armies in the north, west, and in the centre, 
counted in the musters above 70,000 men, besides 
small garrisons and parties abroad. Several of the 
lords, and more of the commons, began to fall off 
from the Parliament and make their peace with the 
king ; and the affairs of the Parliament began to look 
very ill. The city of London was their inexhaustible 
support and magazine both for men, money, and all 
things necessary ; and whenever their army was out 
of order, the clergy of their party in but one Sunday 
or two, would preach the young citizens out of their 
shops, the labourers fit)m their masters, into the army, 
and recruit them on a sudden. And all this was still 
owing to the omission I first observed, of not march- 
[826] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

ing to London, when it might have been so easily 
effected. 

We had now another, or a fairer opportunity, than 
before, but as ill use was made of it. The king, as I 
have observed, was in a very good posture ; he had 
three large armies roving at large over the kingdom. 
The Cornish army, victorious and numerous, had 
beaten Waller, secui*ed and fortified Exeter, which 
the queen had made her residence, and was there de- 
livered of a daughter, the Princess Henrietta Maria, 
afterwards Duchess of Orleans, and mother of the 
Duchess-Dowager of Savoy, commonly known in the 
French style by the title of Madam Royal. They 
had secured Salisbury, Sherborne Castle, Weymouth, 
Winchester, and Basing-house, and commanded the 
whole country, except Bridgewater and Taunton, 
Plymouth and Lynn; all which places they held 
blocked up. The king was also entirely master of 
all Wales, Monmouthshire, Cheshire, Shropshire, 
Staffordshire, Worcestershire, Oxfordshire, Berkshire, 
and all the towns from Windsor up the Tliames to 
Cirencester, except Reading and Henley ; and of the 
whole Severn, except Gloucester. 

The Earl of Newcastle had garrisons in every 
strong place in the north, from Berwick-upon-Tweed 
to Boston in Lincolnshire, and Newark-upon-Trent, 
Hull only excepted, whither the Lord Fairfax and 
his son Sir Tliomas were retreated, their troops being 
routed and broken. Sir Thomas Fairfax his baggage, 
with his lady and servants taken prisoners, and him- 
self hardly escaping. 

And now a great council of war was held in the 
[227] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

king^s quarters, what enterprise to go upon ; and it 
happened to be the very same day when the Parlia- 
ment were in a serious debate what should become 
of them, and whose help they should seek. And in- 
deed they had cause for it ; and had our counsels 
been as ready and well-grounded as theirs, we had 
put an end to the war in a month's time. 

in this council the king proposed the marching 
to London to put an end to the Parliament and en- 
courage his friends and loyal subjects in Kent, who 
wei^ ready to rise for him ; and showed us letters 
from the Earl of Newcastle, wherein he offered to 
join his Majesty with a detachment of 4000 horse 
and 8000 foot, if his Majesty thought fit to march 
southward, and yet leave forces sufficient to guard 
the north from any invasion. I confess, when I saw 
the scheme the king had himself drawn for this at- 
tempt, I felt an unusual satisfaction in my mind, 
from the hopes that we might bring this war to some 
tolerable end ; for I professed myself on all occasions 
heartily weary with fighting with friends, brothers^ 
neighbours, and acquaintance ; and I made no ques- 
tion, but this motion of the king's would effectually 
bring the Pai'liament to reason. 

All men seemed to like the enterprise but the 
Earl of Worcester, who, on particular views for 
securing the countiy behind, as he called it, pro- 
posed the taking in the town of Gloucester and 
Hereford first. He made a long speech of the 
danger of leaving Massey, an active bold fellow, 
with a strong party in the heart of all the king's 
quarters, ready on all occasions to sally out and 
[288] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

surprise the neighbouring garrisons, as he had done 
Sudley Castle and others; and of the ease and 
fireedom to all those western parts to have them 
fully cleared of the enemy. Interest presently 
backs this advice, and all those gentlemen whose 
estates lay that way, or whose friends lived about 
Worcester, Shrewsbury, Bridgnorth, or the borders, 
and who, as they said, had heard the frequent 
wishes of the country to have the city of Gloucester 
reduced, fell in with this advice, alleging the conse- 
quence it was for the commerce of the country to 
have the navigation of the Severn free, which was 
only interrupted by this one town from the sea up 
to Shrewsbury, &amp;c. 

I opposed this, and so did several others. Prince 
Rupert was vehemently against it; and we both 
offered, with the troops of the county, to keep 
Gloucester blocked up during the king'*s march for 
London, so that Massey should not be able to stir. 

This prnposal made the Earl of Worcester's party 
more eager for the siege than before, for they had 
no mind to a blockade which would leave the coun- 
try to maintain the troops all the summer; and 
of all men the prince did not please them, for, he 
having no extraordinary character for discipline, 
his company was not much desired even by our 
friends. Thus, in an ill hour, 'twas resolved to 
sit down before Gloucester. The king had a gallant 
army of 28,000 men, whereof 11,000 horse, the 
finest body of gentlemen that ever I saw togethet 
in my life; their horses without comparison, and 
their equipages the finest and the best in the world, 
[229] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

and their persons Englishmen, which, I think, is 
enough to say of them. 

According to the resolution taken in the council 
of war, the army marched westward, and sat down 
before Gloucester the beginning of August. There 
we spent a month to the least purpose that 
ever army did. Our men received frequent affronts 
from the desperate sallies of an inconsiderable 
enemy. I cannot forbear reflecting on the mis- 
fortunes of tliis siege. Our men were strangely 
dispirited in all the assaults they gave upon the 
place; there was something looked like disaster 
and mismanagement, and our men went on with an 
ill will and no resolution. The king despised the 
place, and the king, to carry it swoixi in hand, 
made no regular approaches, and the gamson, 
being desperate, made therefore the greater slaugh- 
ter. . In this work our horee, who were so numerous 
and so fine, had no employment. Two thousand 
hoi*se had been enough for this business, and the 
enemy had no garrison or party within forty miles 
of us, so that we had nothing to do but look on 
with infinite regret upon the losses of our foot. 

The enemy made frequent and desperate sallies, 
in one of which I had my share. I was posted upon 
a parade or place of arms, with part of my regi- 
ment, and part of Colonel Goring^s regiment of 
horse, in order to support a body of foot, who were 
ordered to storm the point of a breastwork which 
the enemy had raised to defend one of the avenues 
to the town. The foot were beat off with loss, as 
they always were ; and Massey, the governor, not 
[880] . 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

content to have beaten theni fix&gt;ni his works, sallies 
out with near 400 men, and falling in upon the foot 
as they were rallying under the cover of our horse, 
we put ourselves in the best posture we could to 
receive them. As Massey did not expect, I suppose, 
to engage with any horse, he had no pikes with 
him, which encouraged us to treat him the more 
rudely; but as to desperate men danger is no 
danger, when he found he must clear his hands of 
us, before he could despatch the foot, he faces up 
to us, (ires but one volley of his small shot, and fell 
to battering us with the stocks of their muskets in 
such a manner that one would have thought they 
had been madmen. 

We at first despised this way of clubbing us, and 
charging through them, laid a great many of them 
upon the ground, and in repeating our charge, 
trampled more of them under our horses^ feet ; and 
wheeling thus continually, beat them off from our 
foot, who were just upon the point of disbanding. 
Upon this they charged us again with their fire, and 
at one volley killed thirty-three or thirty-four men 
and horses ; and had they had pikes with them, I 
know not what we should have done with them. 
But at last charging through them again, we divided 
them ; one part of them being hemmed in between 
us and our own foot, were cut in pieces to a man ; 
the rest, as I understood afterwards, retreated into 
the town, having lost 800 of their men. 

In this last charge I received a rude blow from a 
stout fellow on foot with the butt end of his musket, 
which perfectly stunned me, and fetched me off from 
[281] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

my horse ; and had not some near me took care of 
me, I had been trod to death by our own men. 
But the fellow being immediately killed, and my 
friends finding me alive, had taken me up, and carried 
me off some distance, where I came to myself again 
after some time, but knew little of what I did or 
said that night This was the reason why I say I 
afterwards understood the enemy retreated; for I 
saw no more what they did then, nor indeed was 
I well of this blow for all the rest of the summer, 
but had frequent pains in my head, dizzinesses and 
swimming, that gave me some fears the blow had 
injured the skull ; but it wore off again, nor did it 
at all hinder my attending my chaige. 

This action, I think, was the only one that looked 
like a defeat given the enemy at this siege. We 
killed them near 800 men, as I have said, and lost 
about sixty of our troopers. 

All this time, while the king was harassing and 
weakening the best army he ever saw together dur- 
ing the whole war, the Parliament generals, or rather 
preachers, were recruiting theirs; for the preachers 
were better than diiimmers to raise volunteers, zeal- 
ously exhorting the London dames to part with their 
husbands, and the city to send some of their trained 
bands to join the army for the relief of Gloucester ; 
and now they began to advance towards us. 

The king hearing of the advance of Essex's army, 
who by this time was come to Aylesbury, had 
summoned what forces he had within call, to join 
him; and accordingly he received 8000 foot from 
Somersetshire ; and having battered the town for 
[282] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

thirty-six hours, and made a fair breach, resolves 
upon an assault, if possible, to carry the town before 
the enemy came up. The assault was begun about 
seven in the evening, and the men boldly mounted 
the breach ; but after a very obstinate and bloody 
dispute, were beaten out again by the besieged with 
great loss. 

Being thus often repulsed, and the Earl of Essex^s 
army approaching, the king calls a council of war, 
and proposed to fight Essex^s army. The officers of 
the horse were for fighting ; and without doubt we 
were superior to him both in number and goodness 
of our horse, but the foot were not in an equal 
condition ; and the colonels of foot representing to 
the king the weakness of their regiments, and how 
their men had been baulked and disheartened at 
this cursed siege, the graver counsel prevailed, and 
it was resolved to raise the siege, and retreat towards 
Bristol, till the army was recruited. Pui'suant to 
this resolution, the 6th of September, the king, 
having before sent away his heavy cannon and 
baggage, raised the siege, and marched to Berkeley 
Castle. The Earl of Essex came the next day to 
Birdlip Hills; and understanding by messengers 
from Colonel Massey, that the siege was raised, 
sends a recruit of S500 men into the city, and followed 
us himself with a great body of horse. 

This body of horse showed themselves to us once 
in a large field fit to have entertained them in ; and 
our scouts having assured us they were not above 
4000, and had no foot with them, the king ordered 
a detachment of about the same number to face 
[233] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

them. I desired his Majesty to let us have two 
regiments of dragoons with us, which was then 
800 men in a regiment, lest there might be some 
dragoons among the enemy ; which the king granted, 
and accordingly we marched, and drew up in view 
of them. They stood their ground, having, as they 
supposed, some advantage of the manner they were 
posted in, and expected we would chai*ge them. 
The king, who did us the honour to command this 
party, finding they would not stir, calls me to him, 
and ordered me with the dragoons, and my own 
r^ment, to take a circuit round by a village to a 
certain lane, where in their retreat they must have 
passed, and which opened to a small common on 
the flank ; with ordei-s, if they engaged, to advance 
and charge them in the flank. I marched imme- 
diately ; but though the country about there was 
almost all enclosures, yet their scouts were so vigi- 
lant, that they discovered me, and gave notice to 
the body; upon which their whole party moved 
to the left, as if they intended to charge me, before 
the king with his body of horse could come. But 
the king was too vigilant to be circumvented so ; 
and therefore his Majesty perceiving this, sends 
away three regiments of horse to second me, and a 
messenger before them, to order me to halt, and 
expect the enemy, for that he would follow with 
the whole body. 

But before this order reached me, I had halted 

for some time; for, finding myself discovered, and 

not judging it safe to be entirely cut off^ from the 

main body, I stopped at the village, and causing 

[284] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

my dragoons to alight, and line a thick hedge on 
my left, I drew up my horse just at the entrance 
into the village opening to a common. The enemy 
came up on the trot to charge me, but were saluted 
with a terrible fire from the dragoons out of the 
hedge, which killed them near 100 men. This 
being a perfect surprise to them, they halted, and just 
at that moment they received orders from their main 
body to retreat ; the king at the same time appear- 
ing upon some small heights in their rear, which 
obliged them to think of retreating, or coming to 
a general battle, which was none of their design. 

I had no occasion to follow them, not being 
in a condition to attack their whole body ; but the 
dragoons coming out into the common, gave them 
another volley at a distance, which reached them 
effectually, for it killed about twenty of them, and 
wounded more ; but they drew off, and never fired a 
shot at us, fearing to be enclosed between two 
paiiics, and so marched away to their general^s 
quarters, leaving ten or twelve more of their fellows 
killed, and about 180 horses. Our men, after the 
country fashion, gave them a shout at parting, to 
let them see we knew they were afraid of us. 

However, this relieving of Gloucester raised the 
spirits as well as the imputation of the Parliament 
forces, and was a great defeat to us ; and from this 
time things began to look with a melancholy aspect, 
for the prosperous condition of the king's cdTairs be- 
gan to decline. The opportunities he had let slip 
were never to be recovered, and the Parliament, in 
their former extremity, having voted an invitation 
[286] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

to the Scots to march to theur assistance, we had 
now new enemies to encounter; and, indeed, there 
b^an the ruin of his Majestj^s affairs, for the Earl 
of Newcastle, not able to defend himself against the 
Scots on his rear, the Earl of Manchester in his 
front, and Sir Thomas Fairfax on his flank, was 
everywhere routed and defeated, and his forces obliged 
to quit the field to the enemy. 

About this time it was that we first began to hear of 
one Oliver Cromwell, who, like a little cloud, rose out 
of the east, and spread first into the north, till it shed 
down a flood that overwhelmed the three kingdoms. 

He first was a private captain of hoi*se, but now 
commanded a regiment whom he armed cap^-jAe i 
la cuirassier; and, joining with the Earl of Man- 
chester, the first action we heaixl of him that made 
him anything famous was about Grantham, where, 
with only his own regiment, he defeated twenty-four 
tix)ops of horse and dragoons of the king'^s forces ; 
then, at Gainsborough, with two regiments, his own 
of hoi*se and one of dragoons, where he defeated 
near 3000 of the Earl of Newcastle's men, killed 
Lieutenant-General Cavendish, brother to the Earl 
of Devonshire, who commanded them, and relieved 
Gainsborough ; and though the whole army came in 
to the rescue, he made good his retreat to Lincoln 
with little loss; and the next week he defeated 
Sir John Henderson at Winceby, near Homcastle, 
with sixteen regiments of horse and dragoons, him- 
self having not half that number ; killed the Lord 
Widdrington, Sir Ingram Hopton, and several 
gentlemen of quality. Thus this firebrand of war 
[286] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

b^n to blaze, and he soon grew a terror to the 
north; for victory attended him like a page of 
honour, and he was scarce ever known to be beaten 
during the whole war. 

Now we began to reflect again on the misfortune 
of our master'*s counsels. Had we marched to Lon- 
don, instead of besieging Gloucester, we had finished 
the war with a stroke. The Parliament's army was 
in a most despicable condition, cuid had never been 
recruited, had we not given them a montVs time, 
which we lingered away at this fatal town of Glouces- 
ter. But 't was too late to reflect ; we were a dis- 
heartened army, but we were not beaten yet, nor 
broken. We had a large country to recruit in, and 
we lost no time, but raised men apace. In the mean- 
time his Majesty, after a short stay at Bristol, 
makes back again towards Oxford with a part of the 
foot and all the horse. 

At Cirencester we had a brush again with Essex ; 
that town owed us a shrewd turn for having handled 
them coarsely enough before, when Prince Rupert 
seized the county magazine. I happened to be in 
the town that night with Sir Nicholas Crisp, whose 
regiment of horse quartered there with Colonel 
Spencer and some foot ; my own regiment was gone 
before to Oxford. About ten at night, a party of 
Essex's men beat up our quarters by surprise, just 
as we had served them before. They fell in with us, 
just as people were going to bed, and having beaten 
the out-guards, were gotten into the middle of the 
town before our men could get on horseback. Sir 
Nicholas Crisp, hearing the alarm, gets up, and with 
[237] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

some of his clothes on, and some off, comes into my 
chamber. "We are all undone,'' says he, " the Round- 
heads are upon us.*' We had but little time to con- 
sult, but being in one of the principal inns in the 
town, we presently ordered the gates of the inn to 
be shut, and sent to all the inns where our men 
were quartered to do the like, with orders, if they 
had any back-doors, or ways to get out, to come to 
us. By this means, however, we got so much time 
as to get on horseback, and so many of our men 
came to us by back ways, that we had near 800 
horse in the yards and places behind the house. 
And now we began to think of breaking out by a 
lane which led from the back side of the inn, but 
a new accident determined us another, though a 
worse way. 

The enemy being entered, and our men cooped up 
in the yards of the inns. Colonel Spencer, the other 
colonel, whose regiment of horse lay also in the town, 
had got on horseback before us, and engaged with 
the enemy, but being overpowered, retreated fight- 
ing, and sends to Sir Nicholas Crisp for help. Sir 
Nicholas, moved to see the distress of his friend, 
turning to me, says he, " What can we do for him P'' 
I told him I thought 't was time to help him, if pos- 
sible ; upon which, opening the inn gates, we sallied 
out in very good order, about 800 horse. And several 
of the troops from other parts of the town joining us, 
we recovered Colonel Spencer, and charging home, 
beat back the enemy to their main body. But find- 
ing their foot drawn up in the churchyard, and several 
detachments moving to charge us, we retreated in as 
[238] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

good order as we could. They did not think fit to 
pursue us, but they took all the carriages which were 
under the convoy of this pcuiy, and laden with pro- 
visions and ammunition, and above 500 of our horse, 
the foot shifted away as well as they could. Thus 
we made off in a shattered condition towards Far- 
ringdon, and so to Oxford, and I was very glad my 
regiment was not there. 

We had small rest at Oxford, or indeed anywhere 
else ; for the king was marched from thence, and we 
followed him. I was something uneasy at my absence 
from my regiment, and did not know how the king 
might resent it, which caused me to ride after them 
with all expedition. But the armies were engaged 
that very day at Newbury, and I came in too late. 
I had not behaved myself so as to be suspected of a 
wilful shunning the action ; but a colonel of a regi- 
ment ought to avoid absence from his regiment in 
time of fight, be the excuse never so just, as carefully 
as he would a surprise in his quarters. The truth is, 
't was an error of my own, and owing to two days'* 
stay I made at the Bath, where I met with some 
ladies who were my relations. And this is far from 
being an excuse ; for if the king had been a Gustavus 
Adolphus, I had certainly received a check for it. 

This fight was very ol^tinate, and could our horse 
have come to action as freely as the foot, the Parlia- 
ment army had suffered much more ; for we had here 
a much better body of horse than they, and we never 
failed beating them where the weight of the work lay 
upon the horse. 

Here the city train-bands, of which there was two 
[239] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

regiments, and whom we used to despise, fought very 
well. They lost one of their colonels, and several 
officers in the action ; and I heard our men say, they 
behaved themselves as well as any forces the Parlia- 
ment had. 

The Parliament cried victory here too, as they 
always did; and indeed where the foot were con- 
cerned they had some advantage ; but our horse de- 
feated them evidently. The king drew up his army 
in battalia, in pei*son, and faced them all the next 
day, inviting them to renew the fight ; but they had 
no stomach to come on again. 

It was a kind of a hedge fight, for neither army 
was drawn out in the field ; if it had, ^t would never 
have held from six in the morning to ten at night. 
But they fought for advantages ; sometimes one side 
had the better, sometimes another. They fought 
twice through the town, in at one end, and out at the 
other ; and in the hedges and lanes, with exceeding 
fury. The king lost the most men, his foot having 
suffered for want of the succour of their horse, who 
on two several occasions could not come at them. 
But the Parliament foot suffered also, and two regi- 
ments were entirely cut in pieces, and the king kept 
the field. 

Essex, the Parliament general, had the pillage of 
the dead, and left us to bury them ; for while we 
stood all day to our arms, having given them a fair 
field to fight us in, their camp rabble stripped the 
dead bodies, and they not daring to venture a 
second engagement with us, marched away towards 
London. 

[240] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

The king lost in this action the Earls of Carnarvon 
and Sunderland, the Lord Falkland, a French marquis 
and some very gallant officers, and about 1200 men. 
The Earl of Carnarvon was brought into an inn in 
Newbury, where the king came to see him. He had 
just life enough to speak to his Majesty, and died in 
his presence. The king was exceedingly concerned 
for him, and was observed to shed tears at the sight 
of it. We wei'e indeed all of us troubled for the loss 
of so brave a gentleman, but the concern our royal 
master discovered, moved us more than ordinary. 
Everybody endeavoured to have the king out of the 
room, but he would not stir from the bedside, till he 
saw all hopes of life was gone. 

The indefatigable industry of the king, his servants 
and friends, continually to supply and recruit his 
forces, and to harass and fatigue the enemy, was 
such, that we should still have given a good account 
of the war had the Scots stood neuter. But bad 
news came every day out of the north ; as for other 
places, parties were always in action. Sir William 
Waller and Sir Ralph Hopton beat one another by 
tunis ; and Sir Ralph had extended the king^s quar- 
ters from Launceston in Cornwall, to Famham in 
Surrey, where he gave Sir William Waller a rub, 
and drove him into the castle. But in the north, 
the storm grew thick, the Scots advanced to the 
borders, and entered England in confederacy with 
the Parliament, against their king; for which the 
Parliament requited them afterwards as they deserved. 

Had it not been for this Scotch army, the Parlia- 
ment had easily been reduced to terms of peace ; but 
l« [ 241 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

after this they never made any proposals fit for the 
king to receive. Want of success before had made 
them differ among themselves. Essex and Waller 
could never agree ; the Earl of Manchester and the 
Lord Willoughby differed to the highest degree; 
and the king^s affairs went never the worse for it. 
But this storm in the north ruined us all ; for the 
Scots prevailed in Yorkshire, and being joined with 
Fairfax, Manchester, and Cromwell, carried all before 
them ; so that the king was obliged to send Prince 
Rupert, with a body of 4000 horse, to the assistance 
of the Earl of Newcastle, where that prince finished 
the destruction of the king^s interest, by the rashest 
and unaccountablest action in the world, of which I 
shall speak in its place. 

Another action of the king^s, though in itself no 
greater a cause of offence than the calling the Scots 
into the nation, gave great offence in general, and 
even the king^s own friends disliked it; and was 
carefully improved by his enemies to the disadvantage 
of the king, and of his cause. 

The rebels in Ireland had, ever since the bloody 
massacre of the Protestants, maintained a war 
against the English, and the Earl of Ormond was 
general and governor for the king. The king, find- 
ing his affairs pinch him at home, sends orders to the 
Earl of Ormond to consent to a cessation of arms 
with the rebels, and to ship over certain of his regi- 
ments hither to his Majesty^s assistance. TTLs true, 
the Irish had deserved to be very ill treated by 
the English ; but while the Parliament pressed the 
king with a cruel and unnatural war at home, and 
[842] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

called in an army out of Scotland to support their 
quarrel with their king, I could never be convinced, 
that it was such a dishonourable action for the king 
to suspend the correction of his Irish rebels till he 
was in a capacity to do it with safety to himself; or 
to delay any farther assistance to preserve himself 
at home ; and the troops he recalled being his own, 
it was no breach of his honour to make use of them, 
since he now wanted them for his own security 
against those who fought against him at home. 

But the king was persuaded to make one step 
farther, and that, I confess, was unpleasing to us all ; 
and some of his best and most faithful servants took 
the freedom to speak plainly to him of it ; and that 
was bringing some regiments of the Irish themselves 
over, lliis cast, as we thought, an odium upon 
our whole nation, being some of those very wretches 
who had dipped their hands in the innocent blood 
of the Protestants, and, with unheard-of butcheries, 
had massacred so many thousands of English in cool 
blood. 

Abundance of gentlemen forsook the king upon 
this score; and seeing they could not brook the 
fighting in conjunction with this wicked generation, 
came into the declaration of the Parliament, and 
making composition for their estates, lived retired 
lives all the rest of the wai', or went abroad. 

But as exigences and necessities oblige us to do 
things which at other times we would not do, 
and is, as to man, some excuse for such things ; so 
I cannot but think the guilt and dishonour of such 
an action must lie, very much of it, at least, at their 
[243] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

doorsy who drove the king to these necessities and 
distresses, by calling in an army of his own subjects 
whom he had not injured, but had complied with 
them in everything, to make war upon him without 
any provocation. 

As to the quarrel between the king and his Parlia- 
ment, there may something be said on both sides; 
and the king saw cause himself to disown and dislike 
some things he had done, which the Parliament 
objected against, such as levying money without con- 
sent of Parliament, infractions on their privileges, 
and the like. Here, I say, was some room for an 
argument at least, and concessions on both sides 
were needful to come to a peace. But for the Scots, 
all their demands had been answered, all their griev- 
ances had been redressed, they had made articles 
with their sovereign, and he had performed those 
articles ; their capital enemy Episcopacy was abol- 
ished ; they had not one thing to demand of the 
king which he h£ul not granted. And therefore they 
had no more cause to take up arms against their 
sovereign than they had against the Grand Seignior. 
But it must for ever lie against them as a brand of 
infamy, and as a reproach on their whole nation 
that, purchased by the Parliament's money, they 
sold their honesty, and rebelled against their king 
for hire; and it was not many years before, as I 
have said already, they were fully paid the wages of 
their unrighteousness, and chastised for their treachery 
by the very same people whom they thus basely 
assisted. Then they would have retrieved it, if it 
had not been too late. 

£244] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

But I could not but accuse this age of injustice 
and partiality, who while they reproached the king 
for his cessation of arms with the Irish rebels, and 
not prosecuting them with the utmost severity, 
though he was constrained by the necessities of the 
war to do it, could yet, at the same time, justify the 
Scots taking up arms in a quarrel they had no concern 
in, and against their own king, with whom they 
had articled and capitulated, and who had so punc- 
tually complied with all their demands, that they 
had no claim upon him, no grievances to be redressed, 
no oppression to cry out of, nor could ask anything 
of him which he had not granted. 

But as no action in the world is so vile, but the 
actors can cover witli some specious pretence, so the 
Scots now passing into England publish a declaration 
to justify their assisting the Parliament. To which 
I shall only say, in my opinion, it was no justification 
at all ; for admit the Parliaments quarrel had been 
never so just, it could not be just in them to aid 
them, because 't was against their own king too, to 
whom they had sworn allegiance, or at least had 
crowned him, and thereby had recognised his author- 
ity. For if maladministration be, according to 
Prynne's doctrine, or according to their own Bu- 
chanan, a sufficient reason for subjects to take 
up arms against their prince, the breach of his 
coronation oath being supposed to dissolve the oath 
of allegiance, which however I cannot believe ; yet 
this can never be extended to make it lawful, that 
because a king of England may, by maladministra- 
tion, discharge the subjects of England from their 
[246] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

allegiance, that therefore the subjects of Scotland 
may take up arms against the King of Scotland, he 
having not infringed the compact of government as 
to them, and they having nothing to complain of 
for themselves. Thus I thought their own argu- 
ments were against them, and Heaven seemed to 
concur with it ; for although they did carry the 
cause for the English rebels, yet the most of them 
left their bones here in the quarrel. 

But what signifies reason to the drum and the 
trumpet ! The Parliament had the supreme argu- 
ment with those men, viz., the money ; and having 
accordingly advanced a good round sum, upon pay- 
ment of iJiis (for the Scots would not stir a foot 
without it) they entered England on the 15th of 
January 1643[-4], with an army of 12,000 men, 
under the command of old Leslie, now Earl of 
Leven, an old soldier of great experience, having 
been bred to arms from a youth in the service of the 
•Prince of Orange. 

The Scots were no sooner entered England but 
they were joined by all the friends to the Parliament 
party in the north ; and first. Colonel Grey, brother 
to the Lord Grey, joined them with a regiment of 
horse, and several out of Westmoi*eland and Cum- 
berland, and so they advanced to Newcastle, which 
they summon to surrender. The Earl of Newcastle, 
who rather saw than was able to prevent this storm, 
was in Newcastle, and did his best to defend it ; but 
the Scots, increased by this time to above 20,000, 
lay close siege to the place, which was but meanly 
fortified, and having repulsed the garrison upon 
[246] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

several saHies, and pressing the place very dose, after 
a siege of twelve days, or thereabouts, they enter the 
town sword in hand. The Earl of Newcastle got away, 
and afterwards gathered what forces together he could, 
but [was] not strong enough to hinder the Scots from 
advancing to Durham, which he quitted to them, nor 
to hinder the conjunction of the Scots with the 
forces of Fairfax, Manchester, and Cromwell, Where- 
upon the earl, seeing all things thus going to wreck, 
he sends his horse away, and retreats with his foot 
into York, making all necessary preparations for a 
vigorous defence there, in case he should be attacked, 
which he was pretty sure of, as indeed afterwards 
happened. York was in a very good posture of de- 
fence, the fortifications very regular, and exceeding 
strong ; well furnished with provisions, and had now 
a garrison of 12,000 men in it. The governor under 
the Earl of Newcastle was Sir Thomas Glemham, a 
good soldier, and a gentleman brave enough. 

The Scots, as I liavc said, having taken Durham, 
Tynemouth Castle, and Sunderland, and being joined 
by Sir Thomas Fairfax, who had taken Selby, re- 
solve, with their united strength, to besiege York ; 
but when they came to view the city, and saw a plan 
of the works, and had intelligence of the strength of 
the garrison, they sent expresses to Manchester and 
Cromwell for help, who came on, and joined them 
with 9000, making together about 30,000 men, rather 
more than less. 

Now had the Earl of Newcastle's repeated mes- 
sengers convinced the king that it was absolutely 
necessary to send some forces to his assistance, or else 
[ 247 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

all would be lost in the north. Whereupon Prince 
Rupert was detached, with orders first to go into 
Lancashire and relieve Lathom House, defended by 
the brave Countess of Derby, and then, taking all the 
forces he could collect in Cheshire, Lancashire, and 
Yorkshire, to march to relieve York, 

The prince marched from Oxford with but three 
regiments of horse and one of dragoons, making in 
all about S800 men. The colonels of horse were 
Colonel Charles Goring, the Lord Byron, and myself; 
the dragoons were of Colonel Smith. In our march 
we were joined by a regiment of horse from Banbury, 
one of dragoons from Bristol, and three regiments of 
horse from Chester, so that when we came into Lan- 
cashire we were about 5000 horse and dragoons. 
These horse we received from Chester were those who, 
having been at the siege of Nantwich, were obliged 
to raise the siege by Sir Thomas Fairfax ; and the 
foot having yielded, the horse made good their retreat 
to Chester, being about 2000, of whom three regi- 
ments now joined us. We received also 2000 foot 
from West Chester, and 2000 more out of Wales, and 
with this strength we entered Lancashire. We had 
not much time to spend, and a great deal of work 
to do. 

Bolton and Liverpool felt the first fury of our 
prince ; at Bolton, indeed, he had some provocation, 
for here we were like to be beaten oiF. When first 
the prince came to the town, he sent a summons to 
demand the town for the king, but received no answer 
but from their guns, commanding the messenger to 
keep off at his peril. They hcul raised some works 
[248] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

about the town, and having by their intelligence 
learnt that we had no artillery, and were only a fly- 
ing party (so they called us), they contemned the 
summons, and showed themselves upon their ram- 
parts, ready for us. The prince was resolved to 
humble them, if possible, and takes up his quarter 
close to the town. In the evening he orders me to 
advance with one regiment of dragoons and my 
horse, to bring them off, if occasion was, and to post 
myself as near as possible I could to the lines, yet 
so as not to be discovered ; and at the same time, 
having concluded what part of the works to fall 
upon, he draws up his men on two other sides, as if 
he would storm them there; and, on a signal, I 
was to begin the real assault on my side with my 
dragoons. 

I had got so near the town with my dragoons, 
making them creep upon their bellies a great way, 
that we could hear the soldiers talk on the walls, 
when the prince, believing one regiment would be too 
few, sends me word that he had ordered a regiment 
of foot to help, and that I should not discover my- 
self till they were come up to me. This broke our 
measures, for the march of this regiment was dis- 
covered by the enemy, and they took the alarm. 
Upon this I sent to the prince, to desire he would 
put off the storm for that night, and I would answer 
for it the next day ; but the prince was impatient, 
and sent orders we should fall on as soon as the foot 
came up to us. The foot marched out of the way, 
missed us, and fell in with a road that leads to 
another part of the town ; and being not able to find 
[249] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

us, make an attack upon the town themselves ; but 
the defendants, being ready for them, received them 
very warmly, and beat them off with great loss. 

I was at a loss now what to do ; for hearing the 
guns, and by the noise knowing it was an assault 
upon the town, I was very uneasy to have my share 
in it ; but as I heui learnt under the King of Sweden 
punctually to adhere to the execution of orders, and 
my orders being to lie still till the foot came up with 
me, I would not stir if I had been sure to have done 
never so much service ; but, however, to satisfy my- 
self, I sent to the prince to let him know that I con- 
tinued in the same place expecting the foot, and none 
being yet come, I desired farther orders. The prince 
was a little amazed at this, and finding there must 
be some mistake, came galloping away in the dark 
to the place and drew oif the men, which was no hard 
matter, for they were willing enough to give it over. 

As for me, the prince ordered me to come off so 
privately as not to be discovered, if possible, which I 
effectually did ; and so we were baulked for that night. 
The next day the prince fell on upon another quarter 
with three regiments of foot, but was beaten off with 
loss, and the like a third time. At last the prince 
resolved to carry it, doubled his numbers, and, renew- 
ing the attack with fresh men, the foot entered the 
town over their works, killing in the first heat of the 
action all that came in their way ; some of the foot 
at the same time letting in the horse, and so the town 
was entirely won. There was about 600 of the enemy 
killed, and we lost above 4^00 in all, which was owing 
to the foolish mistakes we made. Our men got 
[260] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

some plunder here, which the Parliament made a 
great noise about; but it was their due, and they 
bought it dear enough. 

Liverpool did not cost us so much, nor did we get 
so much by it, the people having sent their women 
and childi*en and best goods on board the ships in 
the road ; and as we had no boats to board them 
with, we could not get at them. Here, as at Bolton, 
the town and fort was taken by storm, and the garri- 
son were many of them cut in pieces, which, by the 
way, was their own faults. 

Our next step was Lathom House, which the 
Countess of Derby had gallantly defended above 
eighteen weeks against the Parliament forces ; and 
this lady not only encouraged her men by her cheer- 
ful and noble maintenance of them, but by examples 
of her own undaunted spirit, exposing herself upon 
the walls in the midst of tlie enemy^s shot, would be 
with her men in the greatest dangers ; and she well 
deserved our care of her person, for the enemy were 
prepared to use her very rudely if she fell into their 
hands. 

Upon our approach the enemy drew off, and the 
prince not only effectually relieved this vigorous lady, 
but left her a good quantity of all sorts of ammu- 
nition, three great guns, 600 arms, and 200 men, 
commanded by a major, as her extraordinary guard. 

Here the way being now opened, and our success 
answering our expectation, several bodies of foot 
came in to us from Westmoreland and from Cum- 
berland; and here it was that the prince found 
means to surprise the town of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 
[261] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

which was recovered for the king by the management 
of the mayor of the town, and some loyal gentlemen 
of the county, and a garrison placed there again for 
the king. 

But our main design being the relief of York, the 
prince advanced that way apace, his army still in- 
creasing; and being joined by the Lord Goring 
from Richmondshire with 4000 horse, which were 
the same the Earl of Newcastle had sent away when 
he threw himself into York with the infantry, we 
were now 18,000 effective men, whereof 10,000 horse 
and dragoons ; so the prince, AiU of hopes, and his 
men in good heart, boldly marched directly for 
York. 

The Scots, as much surprised at the taking of 
Newcastle as at the coming of their enemy, began 
to inquire which way they should get home, if they 
should be beaten ; and calling a council of war, they 
all agreed to raise the siege. The prince, who drew 
with him a great train of carriages charged with 
provision and ammunition for the relief of the city, 
like a wary general, kept at a distance from the 
enemy, and fetching a great compass about, brings 
all safe into the city, and enters into York himself 
with all his army. 

No action of this whole war had gained the prince 
so much honour, or the king'^s aifaiils so much advan- 
tage, as this, had the prince but had the power to 
have restrained his courage after this, and checked 
his fatal eagerness for fighting. Here was a siege 
raised, the reputation of the enemy justly stirred, a 
city relieved, and furnished with all things necessary 
[858] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

in the face of an army superior in number by near 
10,000 men, and commanded by a triumvirate of 
Generals Leven, Fairfax, and Manchester. Had the 
prince but remembered the proceeding of the great 
Duke of Parma at the relief of Paris, he would have 
seen the relieving the city was his business ; ^t was 
the enemy's business to fight if possible, 't was his 
to avoid it ; for, having delivei^ed the city, and put 
the disgrace of raising the siege upon the enemy, he 
had nothing further to do but to have waited till he 
had seen what course the enemy would take, and 
taken his further measures from their motion. 

But the prince, a continual friend to precipitant 
counsels, would hear no advice. I entreated him not 
to put it to the hazard ; I told him that he ought to 
consider if he lost the day he lost the kingdom, and 
took the crown off from the king's head. I put him 
in mind that it was impossible those three generals 
should continue long together ; and that if they did, 
they would not agree long in their counsels, which 
would be as well for us as their separating. T was 
plain Manchester and Cromwell must return to the 
associated counties, who would not suffer them to 
stay, for fear the king should attempt them. That 
he could subsist well enough, having York city and 
river at his back ; but the Scots would eat up the 
country, make themselves odious, and dwindle away 
to nothing, if he would but hold them at bay a 
little. Other general officers were of the same mind ; 
but all I could say, or they either, to a man deaf to 
anything but his own courage, signified nothing. 
He would draw out and fight; there was no pcr- 
[253] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

suading him to the contrary, unless a man would run 
the risk of being upbraided with being a coward, 
and afraid of the work. The enemy^s army lay on 
a large common, called Marston Moor, doubtful 
what to do. Some were for fighting the prince, the 
Scots were against it, being uneasy at having the 
garrison of Newcastle at their backs ; but the prince 
brought their councils of war to a I'esult, for he let 
them know they must fight him, whether they would 
or no ; for the prince being, as before, 18,000 men, 
and the Earl of Newcastle having joined him with 
8000 foot out of the city, were marched in quest of 
the enemy, had entered the moor in view of their 
army, and began to draw up in order of battle ; but 
the night coming on, the armies only viewed each 
other at a distance for that time. We lay all night 
upon our arms, and with the first of the day were in 
order of battle ; the enemy was getting ready, but 
part of Manchester's men were not in the field, but 
lay about three miles off, and made a hasty march to 
come up. 

The prince his army was exceedingly well man- 
aged; he himself commanded the left wing, the 
Earl of Newcastle the right wing ; and the Lord 
Goring, as general of the foot, assisted by Major- 
General Porter and Sir Charles Lucas, led the main 
battle. I had prevailed with the prince, according 
to the method of the King of Sweden, to place 
some small bodies of musketeers in the intervals 
of his horse, in the left wing, but could not pre- 
vail upon the Earl of Newcastle to do it in the 
right, which he afterwards repented. In this pos- 
[264] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

ture we stood facing the enemy, expecting they 
would advance to us, which at last they did ; and 
the prince began the day by saluting them with 
his artillery, which, being placed very well, galled 
them terribly for a quarter of an hour. They could 
not shift their front, so they advanced the hastier 
to get within our great guns, and consequently out 
of their danger, which brought the fight the sooner 
on. 

The enemy^s army was thus ordered : Sir Thomas 
Fairfax hfiwl the right wing, in which was the Scots 
hoi*se, and the horse of his own and his father'^s 
army; Cromwell led the left wing, with his own 
and the Earl of Manchester's horse, and the three 
generals, Leslie, old Fairfax, and Manchester, led 
the main battle. 

The prince, with our left wing, fell on first, and, 
with his usual fury, broke like a clap of thunder 
into the right wing of the Scots horse, led by Sir 
Thomas Fairfax, and, as nothing could stand in his 
way, he broke through and through them, and 
entirely routed them, pursuing them quite out 
of the field. Sir Thomas Fairfax, with a regi- 
ment of lances, and about 500 of his own horse, 
made good the ground for some time ; but our 
musketeers, which, as I said, were placed among 
our horse, were such an unlooked-for sort of an 
article in a fight among the horae, that those 
lances, which otherwise wei*e brave fellows, were 
mowed down with their shot, and all was put into 
confusion. Sir Thomas Fairfax was wounded in the 
face, his brother killed, and a gi-eat slaughter was 
[255 1 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

made of the Scots, to whom I confess we showed 
no favour at all. 

While this was doing on our left, the Lord 
Goring with the main battle charged the enemy^s 
foot; and particularly one brigade commanded by 
Major-General Porter, being mostly pikemen, not 
regarding the fire of the enemy, charged with that 
fury in a close body of pikes, that they overturned 
all that came in their way, and breaking into the 
middle of the enemy^s foot, filled all with terror 
and confusion, insomuch that the three generals, 
thinking all had been lost, fled, and quitted the 
field. 

But matters went not so well with that always 
unfortunate gentleman the Earl of Newcastle and 
our right wing of horse ; for Cromwell charged the 
Earl of Newcastle with a powerful body of horse. 
And though the earl, and those about him, did 
what men could do, and behaved themselves with 
all possible gallantry, yet there was no withstanding 
CromwelFs horse, but, like Prince Rupert, they 
bore down all before them. And now the victory 
was wrung out of our hands by our own gross 
miscarriage ; for the prince, as ^t was his custom, 
too eager in the chase of the enemy, was gone, and 
could not be heard of. The foot in the centre, the 
right wing of the horse being routed by Cromwell, 
was left, and without the guard of his horse; 
Ci'omwell having routed the Earl of Newcastle, and 
beaten him quite out of the field, and Sir Thomas 
Fairfax rallying his dispersed troops, they fall all 
together upon the foot. General Lord Gk&gt;ring, 
[266] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

like himself, fought like a lion, but, forsaken of 
his horse, was hemmed in on all sides, and over* 
thrown ; and an hour after this, the prince return- 
ing, too late to recover his friends, was obliged with 
the rest to quit the field to conquerors. 

This was a fatal day to the king^s affairs, and the 
risk too much for any man in his wits to run ; we 
lost 4000 men on the spot, 3000 prisoners, among 
whom was Sir Charles Lucas, Major-General Porter, 
Major-General Tilyard, and about 170 gentlemen of 
quality. We lost all our baggage, twenty-five pieces 
of cannon, 300 carriages, 150 barrels of powder, and 
10,000 arms. The prince got into York with the 
Earl of Newcastle, and a great many gentlemen ; 
and 7000 or 8000 of the men, as well horse as foot. 

I had but very coarse treatment in this fight ; for 
returning with the prince from the pursuit of the 
right wing, and finding all lost, I halted with some 
other officers, to consider what to do. At first we 
were for making our retreat in a body, and might 
have done so well enough, if we had known what 
hod happened, before we saw ourselves in the middle 
of the enemy ; for Sir Thomas Fairfax, who had got 
together his scattered troops, and joined by some of 
the left wing, knowing who we were, charged us 
with great fury. T was not a time to tliink of any- 
thing but getting away, or dying upon the spot ; 
the prince kept on in the front, and Sir Thomas 
Fairfax by this charge cut off about three regiments 
of us from our body ; but bending his main strength 
at the prince, left us, as it were, behind him, in the 
middle of the field of battle. We took this for the 
17 [ 267 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

only opportunity we could have to get off, and join- 
ing together, we made across the place of battle in 
as good order as we could, with our carabines pre- 
sented. In this posture we passed by several bodies 
of the enemy^s foot, who stood with their pikes 
charged to keep us off; but they had no occasion, for 
we had no design to meddle with them, but to get 
from them. 

Thus we made a swift march, and thought our- 
selves pretty secure ; but our work was not done yet, 
for on a sudden we saw ourselves under a necessity 
of fighting our way through a great body of Man- 
chester's hoi*se, who came galloping upon us over the 
moon They had, as we suppose, been pursuing some 
of our broken troops which were fled before, and 
seeing us, they gave us a home charge. We re- 
ceived them as well as we could, but pushed to get 
through them, which at last we did with a consider- 
able loss to them. However, we lost so many men, 
either killed or separated from us (for all could not 
follow the same way), that of our three regiments 
we could not be above 400 horse together when we 
got quite clear, and these were mixed men, some of 
one troop and regiment, some of another. Not that 
I believe many of us were killed in the last attack, 
for we had plainly the better of the enemy, but our 
design being to get off, some shifted for themselves 
one way and some another, in the best manner they 
could, and as their several fortunes guided them. 
Four hundred more of this body, as I afterwaixJs 
understood, having broke through the enemy's body 
another way, kept together, and got into Pontefract 
[868] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Castle, and 300 more made northward and to Skip- 
ton, where the prince afterwards fetched them off. 

These few of us that were left together, with whom 
I was, being now pretty dear of pursuit, halted, and 
began to inquire who and who we were, and what we 
should do; and on a short debate, I proposed we 
should make to the first garrison of the king^s that 
we could recover, and that we should keep together, 
lest the country people should insult us upon the 
roads. With this resolution we pushed on westward 
for Lancashire, but our misfortunes were not yet at 
an end. We travelled very hard, and got to a vil- 
lage upon the river Wharfe, near Wetherby. At 
Wetherby there was a bridge, but we understood 
that a party from Leeds had secured the town and 
the post, in order to stop the flying Cavaliers, and 
that 't would be very hard to get through there, 
though, as we understood afterwards, there were no 
soldiers there but a guard of the townsmen. In this 
pickle we consulted what course to take. To stay 
where we were till morning, we all concluded, would 
not be safe. Some advised to take the stream with 
our horses, but the river, which is deep, and the cur- 
rent strong, seemed to bid us have a care what we did 
of that kind, especially in the night. We resolved 
therefore to refresh ourselves and our horses, which 
indeed is more than we did, and go on till we might 
come to a ford or bridge, whei-e we might get over. 
Some guides we had, but they either were foolish or 
false, for after we had rode eight or nine miles, they 
plunged us into a river at a place they called a ford, 
but 't was a very ill one, for most of our horses swam, 
[269] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

and seven or eight were lost, but we saved the men. 
However, we got all over. 

We made bold with our first convenience to tres* 
pass upon the country for a few horses, where we 
could find them, to remount our men whose horses 
were drowned, and continued our march. But being 
obliged to refresh ourselves at a small village on 
the edge of Bramham Moor, we found the country 
alarmed by our taking some horses, and we were no 
sooner got on horseback in the morning, and enter- 
ing on the moor, but we understood we were pursued 
by some troops of horse. There was no remedy but 
we must pass this moor ; and though our horses were 
exceedingly tired, yet we pressed on upon a round 
trot, and recovered an enclosed country on the other 
side, where we halted. And here, necessity putting 
us upon it, we were obliged to look out for more 
horses, for several of our men were dismounted, and 
others^ horses disabled by carrying double, those who 
lost their horses getting up behind them. But we 
were supplied by our enemies against their will. 

The enemy followed us over the moor, and we 
having a woody enclosed country about us, where 
we were, I observed by their moving, they had lost 
sight of us ; upon which I proposed concealing our- 
selves till we might judge of their numbers. We did 
so, and lying close in a wood, they passed hastily by 
us, without skirting or searching the wood, which 
was what on another occasion they would not have 
done. I found they were not above 150 horse, and 
considering, that to let them go before us, would be 
to alarm the country, and stop our design, I thought, 
[860 ] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

since we might be able to deal with them, we should 
not meet with a better place for it, and told the rest 
of our officers my mind, which all our party presently 
(for we had not time for a long debate) agreed to. 

Immediately upon this I caused two men to fire 
their pistols in the wood, at two different places, as 
far asunder as I could. This I did to give them an 
alarm, and amase them ; for being in the lane, they 
would otherwise have got through before we had 
been ready, and I resolved to engage them there, as 
soon as ^t was possible. After this alarm, we rushed 
out of the wood, with about a hundred horse, and 
charged them on the flank in a broad lane, the wood 
being on their right. Our passage into the lane being 
narrow, gave us some difficulty in our getting out ; 
but the surprise of the charge did our work ; for the 
enemy, thinking we had been a mile or two before, 
had not the least thoughts of this onset, till they 
heard us in the wood, and then they who were before 
could not come back. We broke into the lane just 
in the middle of them, and by that means divided 
them ; and facing to the left, charged the rear. 
First our dismounted men, which were near fifty, 
lined the edge of the wood, and fired with their 
carabines upon those which were before, so warmly, 
that they put them into a great disorder. Mean- 
while fifty more of our hoi-se from the farther part 
of the wood showed themselves in the lane upon their 
front. This put them of the foremost party into a 
great perplexity, and they began to face about, to fall 
upon us who were engaged in the rear. But their 
&amp;cing about in a lane where there was no room to 
[261] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

wheel, as one who understands the manner of wheeling 
a troop of horse must imagine, put them into a great 
disorder. Our party in the head of the lane taking 
the advantage of this mistake of the enemy, charged 
in upon them, and routed them entirely. 

Some found means to break into the enclosures on 
the other side of the lane, and get away. About 
thirty were killed, and about twenty-five made pris- 
oners, and forty very good horses were taken ; all 
this while not a man of ours was lost, and not above 
seven or eight wounded. Those in the rear behaved 
themselves better, for Ihey stood our charge with a 
great deal of resolution, and all we could do could 
not break them ; but at last our men who had fired 
on foot through the hedges at the other party, com- 
ing to do the like here, there was no standing it any 
longer. The rear of them faced about and retreated 
out of the lane, and drew up in the open field to 
receive and rally their fellows. We killed about 
seventeen of them, and followed them to the end of 
the lane, but had no mind to have any more fighting 
than needs must, our condition at that time not 
making it proper, the towns round us being all in 
the enemy's hands, and the country but indifferently 
pleased with us ; however, we stood facing them till 
they thought fit to march away. Thus we were 
supplied with horses enough to remount our men, 
and pursued our first design of getting into Lanca- 
shire. As for our prisoners, we let them off^ on foot. 

But the country being by this time alarmed, and 
the rout of our army everywhere known, we foresaw 
abundance of difficulties before us; we were not 
[262] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

strong enough to venture into any great towns, and 
we were too many to be concealed in small ones. 
Upon this we resolved to halt in a great wood about 
three miles beyond the place, where we had the last 
skirmish, and sent our scouts to discover the country, 
and learn what they could, either of the enemy or 
of our friends. 

Anybody may suppose we had but indifferent 
quarters here, either for ourselves or for our horses ; 
but, however, we made shift to lie here two days and 
one night. In the interim I took upon me, with 
two more, to go to Leeds to learn some news ; we 
were disguised like country ploughmen ; the clothes 
we got at a farmer^s house, which for that particular 
occasion we plundered ; and I cannot say no blood 
was shed in a manner too rash, and which I could 
not have done at another time ; but our case was 
desperate, and the people too surly, and shot at us 
out of the window, wounded one man and shot 
a horse, which we counted as great a loss to us as a 
man, for our safety depended upon our hoi'ses. 
Here we got clothes of all sorts, enough for both 
sexes, and thus dressing myself up au paysan^ with 
a white cap on my head, and a fork on my shoulder, 
and one of my comrades in the farmer^s wife's russet 
gown and petticoat, like a woman, the other with an 
old crutch like a lame man, and all mounted on such 
horses as we had taken the day before from the coun- 
try, away we go to Leeds by three several ways, and 
agreed to meet upon the bridge. My pretended 
country woman acted her part to the life, though the 
party was a gentleman of good quality, of the Earl 
[263] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER * 

of Worcester's family ; and the cripple did as well as 
he ; but I thought myself very awkward in my dress, 
which made me very shy, especially among the 
soldiers. We passed their sentinels and guards at 
Leeds unobserved, and put up our horses at several 
houses in the town, from whence we went up and 
down to make our remarks. My cripple was the 
fittest to go among the soldiers, because there 
was less danger of being pressed. There he informed 
himself of the mattei'S of war, particularly that the 
enemy sat down again to the siege of York ; that 
flying parties were in pursuit of the Cavaliei*s ; and 
there he heard that 600 horse of the Lord Man- 
chester's men had followed a party of Cavaliers, over 
Bramham Moor, and that entering a lane, the Cav- 
aliers, who were 1000 strong, fell upon them, 
and killed them all but about fifty. This, though 
it was a lie, was very pleasant to us to hear, knowing 
it was our party, because of the other part of the 
story, which was thus : That the Cavaliers had taken 
possession of such a wood, where they rallied all the 
troops of their flying army ; that they had plundered 
the country as they came, taking all the horses they 
could get; that they had plundered Goodman 
Thomson's house, which was the farmer I mentioned, 
and killed man, woman, and child ; and that they 
were about SOOO strong. 

My other friend in woman's clothes got among the 
good wives at an inn, where she set up her horse, and 
there she heard the same sad and dreadful tidings ; 
and that this party was so strong, none of the neigh- 
bouring gaiTisons durst stir out ; but that they had 
[264] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

sent expresses to York, for a party of horse to come 
to their assistance. 

I walked up and down the town, but fancied myself 
so ill disguised, and so easy to be known, that I cared 
not to talk with anybody. We met at the bridge 
exactly at our time, and compared our intelligence, 
found it answered our end of coming, and that we 
had nothing to do but to get back to our men ; but 
my cripple told me, he would not stir till he bought 
some victuals ; so away he hops with his crutch, and 
buys four or five great pieces of bacon, as many of 
hung beef, and two or three loaves ; and boiTowing 
a sack at the inn (which I suppose he never restored), 
he loads his horse, and getting a large leather bottle, 
he filled that of aqua-vitae, instead of small beer ; 
my woman comrade did the like. I was uneasy in 
my mind, and took no care but to get out of the 
town ; however, we all came off well enough ; but 
't was well for me that I had no provisions with me, 
as you will hear presently. 

We came, as I said, into the town by several ways, 
and so we went out ; but about three miles from the 
town we met again exactly where we had agreed. I 
being about a quarter of a mile from the rest, I meets 
thi*ee country fellows on horseback ; one had a long 
pole on his shoulder, another a fork, the third no 
weapon at all, that I saw. I gave them the road very 
orderly, being habited like one of their brethren ; but 
one of them stopping short at me, and looking 
earnestly, calls out, " Hark thee, friend," says he, in 
a broad north-country tone, " whar hast thou thilk 
horse P " I must confess I was in the utmost confu- 
[266] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

sion at the question, neither being able to answer the 
question, nor to speak in his tone; so I made as if I 
did not hear him, and went on. *^Na, but ye^s not 
gang soa,^ says the boor, and comes up to me, and 
takes hold of the horse^s bridle to stop me ; at which, 
vexed at heai*t that I could not tell how to talk to 
him, I reached him a great knock on the pate with 
my fork, and fetched him off of his horse, and then 
began to mend my pace. The other clowns, though 
it seems they knew not what the fellow wanted, pur- 
sued me, and finding they had better heels than I, I 
saw there was no remedy but to make use of my 
hands, and faced about. 

The first that came up with me was he that had 
no weapons, so I thought I might parley with him, 
and speaking as country-like as I could, I asked him 
what he wanted ? " Thou 'st knaw that soon,** says 
Yorkshire, " and ise but come at thee.^ ** Then keep 
awa\ man,** said I, " or ise brain thee.** By this 
time the third man came up and the parley ended ; 
for he gave me no woi*ds, but laid at me with his 
long pole, and that with such fury, that I began to 
be doubtful of him. I was loth to shoot the fellow, 
though I had pistols under my grey frock, as well 
for that the noise of a pistol might bring more 
people in, the village being on our rear, and also be- 
cause I could not imagine what tlie fellow meant, or 
would have. But at last, finding he would be too 
many for me with that long weapon, and a hardy 
strong fellow, I threw myself off my horse, and run- 
ning in with him, stabbed my fork into his horse. 
The horse being wounded, staggered awhile, and then 
[866] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

fell down, and the booby had not the sense to get 
down in time, but fell with him. Upon which, giv- 
ing him a knock or two with my fork, I secured him. 
The other, by this time, had furnished himself with 
a great stick out of a hedge, and before I was disen- 
gaged from the last fellow, gave me two such blows, 
that if the last had not missed my head and hit me 
on the shoulder, I had ended the fight and my life 
together. T was time to look about me now, for 
this was a madman. I defended myself with my 
fork, but '^t would not do. At last, in short, I was 
forced to pistol him and get on horseback again, and 
with all the speed I could make, get away to the 
wood to our men. 

If my two fellow-spies had not been behind, I had 
never known what was the meaning of this quarrel 
of the three countrymen, but my cripple had all the 
particulai-s. For he being behind us, as I have 
already observed, when he came up to the first fellow 
who began the fray, he found him beginning to come 
to himself. So he gets off, and pretends to help him, 
and sets him up upon his breech, and being a very 
merry fellow, talked to him : " Well, and what'*s the 
matter now?'' says he to him. "Ah, wae's me,** 
says the fellow, " I is killed.*" " Not quite, mon,** 
says the cripple. " Oh that 's a fau thief, "^ says he, 
and thus they parleyed. My cripple got him on's 
feet, and gave him a dram of his aqua-vitse bottle, 
and made much of him, in order to know what was 
the occasion of the quarreL Our disguised woman 
pitied the fellow too, and together they set him up 
again upon his horse, and then he told him that that 
[267] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

fellow was got upon one of his brother^s horses who 
lived at Wetherby. They said the Cavaliers stole 
him, but ^t was like such rogues. No mischief could 
be done in the country, but ^t was the poor Cavaliers 
must bear the blame, and the like, and thus they 
jogged on till they came to the place where the 
other two lay. The first fellow they assisted as they 
had done t^ other, and gave him a dram out of the 
leather bottle, but the last fellow was past their 
care, so they came away. For when they understood 
that ^t was my horse they claimed, they began to be 
afraid that their own horses might be known too, and 
then they had been betrayed in a worse pickle than 
I, and must have been forced to have done some 
mischief or other to have got away. 

I had sent out two troopers to fetch them off, 
if there was any occasion ; but their stay was not 
long, and the two troopers saw them at a distance 
coming towards us, so they returned. 

I had enough of going for a spy, and my com- 
panions had enough of staying in the wood; for 
other intelligences agreed with ours, and all con- 
curred in this, that it was time to be going ; how- 
ever, this use we made of it, that while the country 
thought us so strong we were in the less danger of 
being attacked, though in the more of being ob- 
served ; but all this while we heard nothing of our 
friends till the next day. We heard Prince Rupert, 
with about 1000 horse, was at Skipton, and from 
thence marched away to Westmoreland. 

We concluded now we had two or three days' 
time good ; for, since messengers were sent to York 
[868] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

for a party to suppress us, we must have at least 
two days^ inarch of them, and therefore all con- 
cluded we were to make the best of our way. Early 
in the morning, therefore, we decamped from those 
dull quarters ; and as we marched through a village 
we found the people very civil to us, and the women 
cried out, "Grod bless them, 'tis pity the Round- 
heads should make such work with such brave men,^ 
and the like. Finding we were among our friends, 
we resolved to halt a little and refresh ourselves ; 
and, indeed, the people were very kind to us, gave 
us victuals and drink, and took care of our horses. 
It happened to be my lot to stop at a house where 
the good woman took a great deal of pains to pro- 
vide for us ; but I observed the good man walked 
about with a cap upon his head, and very much 
out of order. I took no great notice of it, being 
very sleepy, and having asked my landlady to let 
me have a bed, I lay down and slept heartily. 
Wlicn I waked I found my landlord on another 
bed groaning very heavily. 

When I came downstairs, I found my cripple 
talking with my landlady ; he was now out of his 
disguise, but we called him cripple still; and the 
other, who put on the woman's clothes, we called 
Goody Thompson, As soon as he saw me, he called 
me out, " Do you know,*" says he, " the man of the 
house you are quartered in?** "No, not I,'' says 
I. " No ; so I believe, nor they you,'' says he ; "if 
they did, the good wife would not have made you 
a posset, and fetched a white loaf for you." " What 
do you mean ? " says I. " Have you seen the man ?" 
[269] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

says he. " Seen him^'' says I ; " yes, and heard him 
too; the man^s sick, and groans so heavily,^ says 
I, ^^ that I could not lie upon the bed any longer 
for him.'' " Why, this is the poor man,'' says he, 
** that you knocked down with your fork yesterday, 
and I have had all the story out yonder at the 
next door." I confess it grieved me to have been 
forced to treat one so roughly who was one of our 
friends, but to make some amends, we contrived 
to give the poor man his brother's horse ; and my 
cripple told him a formal story, that he believed 
the horse was taken away fix&gt;m the fellow by some 
of our men, and if he knew him again, if 't was his 
friend's horse, he should have him. The man came 
down upon the news, and I caused six or seven 
horses, which we]*e taken at the same time, to be 
shown him; he immediately chose the right; so I 
gave him the horse, and we pretended a great deal 
of sorrow for the man's hurt, and that we had not 
knocked the fellow on the head as well as took away 
the horse. The man was so overjoyed at the 
revenge he thought was taken on the fellow, that 
we heard him groan no more. 

We ventured to stay all day at this town and 
the next night, and got guides to lead us to Black- 
stone Edge, a ridge of mountains which part this 
side of Yorkshire from Lancashire. Early in the 
morning we marched, and kept our scouts very 
carefully out every way, who brought us no news 
for this day. We kept on all night, and made our 
horses do penance for that little rest they had, and 
the next morning we passed the hills and got into 
[270] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Lancashire, to a town called Littlebrough, and from 
thence to Rochdale, a little market town. And 
now we thought ourselves safe as to the pursuit of 
enemies from the side of York. Our design was to 
get to Bolton, but all the county was full of the 
enemy in flying parties, and how to get to Bolton 
we knew not. At last we resolved to send a mes- 
senger to Bolton ; but he came back and told us he 
had with lurking and hiding tried all the ways that 
he thought possible, but to no purpose, for he could 
not get into the town. We sent another, and he 
never returned, and some time after we undei*stood 
he was taken by the enemy. At last one got into 
the town, but brought us word they were tired out 
with constant alarms, had been strictly blocked up, 
and every day expected a siege, and therefore 
advised us either to go northward, where Prince 
Rupert and the Lord Goring ranged at liberty, or 
to get over Warrington Bridge, and so secure our 
retreat to Chester. 

This double direction divided our opinions. I 
was for getting into Chester, both to recruit myself 
with horses and with money, both which I wanted, 
and to get refreshment, which we all wanted ; but 
the major part of our men were for the north. First 
they said there was their general, and ^t was their 
duty to the cause, and the king's interest obliged us 
to go where we could do best service ; and there was 
their friends, and every man might hear some news 
of his own regiment, for we belonged to several 
regiments. Besides, all the towns to the left of us 
were possessed by Sir William Brereton, Warrington, 
[271] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

and Northwich, garrisoned by the enemy, and a 
strong party at Manchester, so that't was very likely 
we should be beaten and dispersed before we could 
get to Chester. These reasons, and especially the 
last, determined us for the north, and we had re- 
solved to march the next morning, when other in- 
telligence brought us to more speedy resolutions. 
We kept our scouts continually abroad to bring us 
intelligence of the enemy, whom we expected on our 
backs, and also to keep an eye upon the country ; 
for, as we lived upon them something at large, they 
were ready enough to do us any ill turn, as it lay in 
their power. 

The first messenger that came to us was from our 
friends at Bolton, to inform us that they were pre- 
paring at Manchester to attack us. One of our 
parties had been as far as Stockport, on the edge of 
Cheshire, and was pursued by a party of the enemy, 
but got off by the help of the night. Thus, all 
things looking black to the south, we had resolved 
to march northward in the morning, when one of our 
scouts fi*om the side of Manchester assured us Sir 
Thomas Middleton, with some of the Parliament 
forces and the country troops, making above ISOO 
men, were on their march to attack us, and would 
certainly beat up our quarters that night. Upon 
this advice we resolved to be gone ; and, getting all 
things in readiness, we. b^an to march about two 
hours before night. And having gotten a trusty 
fellow for a guide, a fellow that we found was a 
friend to our side, he put a project into my head 
which saved us all for that time ; and that was^ to 
[272] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

give out in the village that we were marched back to 
Yorkshire, resolving to get into Pontefract Castle ; 
and accordingly he leads us out of the town the 
same way we came in, and, taking a boy with him, 
he sends the boy back just at night, and bade him 
say he ^saw us go up the hills at Blackstone Edge ; 
and it happened very well, for this party were so 
sure of us, that they had placed 400 men on the 
road to the northward to intercept our retreat that 
way, and had left no way for us, as they thought, 
to get away but back again. 

About ten o'^clock at night, they assaulted our 
quarters, but found we were gone; and being in- 
formed which way, they followed upon the spur, and 
travelling all night, being moonlight, they found 
themselves the next day about fifteen miles east, 
just out of their way. For we had, by the help of 
our guide, turned short at the foot of the hills, and 
through blind, untrodden patlis, and with difficulty 
enough, by noon tlie next day had reached almost 
twenty-five miles north, near a town called Clitheroe. 
Here we halted in the open field, and sent out our 
people to see how things were in the country. This 
part of the country, almost unpassable, and walled 
round with hills, was indifferent quiet, and we got 
some refreshment for ourselves, but very little horse- 
meat, and so went on. But we had not marched far 
before we found ourselves discovered, and the 400 
horse sent to lie in wait for us as before, having un- 
derstood which way we went, followed us hard ; and 
by letters to some of their friends at Preston, we 
found we were beset again. 
18 [ 273 ] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Our guide b^an now to be out of his knowledge, 
and our scouts brought us word, the enemy*s horse 
was posted before us, and we knew they were in our 
rear. In this exigence, we resolved to divide our 
small body, and so amusing them, at least one might 
get off, if the other miscarried. I took about eighty 
horse with me, among which were all that I had of 
our own regiment, amounting to above thirty-two, 
and took the hills towards Yorkshire. Here we met 
with such unpassable hills, vast moors, rocks, and 
stony ways, as lamed all our horses, and tired our 
men ; and sometimes I was ready to think we should 
never be able to get over them, till our horses fail- 
ing, and jackboots being but indifferent things to 
travel in, we might be starved before we should find 
any road, or towns ; for guide we had none, but a 
boy who knew but little, and would ciy when we 
asked him any questions. I believe neither men nor 
horses ever passed in some places where we went, and 
for twenty hours we saw not a town or a house, ex- 
cepting sometimes from the top of the mountains, 
at a vast distance. I am persuaded we might have 
encamped here, if we had had provisions, till the 
war had been over, and have met with no disturb- 
ance ; and I have often wondered since, how we got 
into such horrible places, as much as how we got out. 
That which was worse to us than all the rest, was, 
that we knew not where we were going, nor what 
part of the country we should come into, when we 
came out of those desolate crags. At last, after a 
terrible fatigue, we b^an to see the western parts 
of Yorkshire, some few villages, and the country at a 
[274] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

distance looked a little like England, for I thought 
before it looked like old Brennus Hill, which the 
Grisons call the "grandfather of the Alps.'* We 
got some relief in the villages, which indeed some of 
us had so much need of, that they were hardly able 
to sit their horses, and others were forced to help 
them off, they were so faint. I never felt so much 
of the power of hunger in my life, for having not 
eaten in thirty hours, I was as ravenous as a hound ; 
and if I had had a piece of horse-flesh, I believe I 
should not have had patience to have staid dressing 
it, but have fallen upon it raw, and have eaten it as 
greedily as a Tartar. However, I ate very cau- 
tiously, having often seen the danger of men's eating 
heartily after long fasting. 

Our next care was to inquire our way. HcJifax, 
they told us, was on our right. There we durst not 
think of going. Skipton was before us, and there 
we knew not how it was, for a body of 3000 horse, 
sent out by the enemy in pursuit of Prince Rupert, 
had been there but two days before, and the country 
people could not tell us whether they were gone, or no. 
And Manchester's horse, which were sent out after 
our party, were then at Halifax, in quest of us, and 
afterwards marched into Cheshire. In this distress 
we would have hired a guide, but none of tlie 
country people would go with us, for the Round- 
heads would hang them, they said, when they came 
there. Upon this I called a fellow to me, " Hark 
ye, friend," says I, " dost thee know the way so as to 
bring us into Westmoreland, and not keep the great 
road from York ? '^ " Ay, merry," says he, " I ken 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the ways weel enou!^ ^^And you would go and 
guide us,^ said I, ^^but that you are afraid the 
Roundheads will hang you?** ** Indeed would I,** 
says the fellow. " Why then," says I, " thou hadst 
as good be hanged by a CavcJier as a Roundhead, 
for if thou wilt not go, I ^U hang thee just now." 
^^ Na, an ye serve me soa," says the fellow, ^^ Ise ene 
gang with ye, for I care not for hanging ; and ye ^11 
get me a good horse, Ise gang and be one of ye, for 
I ^11 nere come heame more." This pleased us still 
better, and we mounted the fellow, for three of our 
men died that night with the extreme fatigue of the 
last service. 

Next morning, when our new trooper was mounted 
and clothed we hardly knew him ; and this fellow led 
us by such ways, such wildernesses, and yet with such 
prudence, keeping the hills to the left, that we might 
have the villages to refresh ourselves, that without 
him, we had certainly either perished in those 
mountains, or fallen into the enemy'^s hands. We 
passed the great road from York so critically as to 
time, that from one of the hills he showed us a party 
of the enemy^s horse, who were then marching into 
Westmoreland. We lay still that day, finding we 
were not discovered by them ; and our guide proved 
the best scout that we could have had ; for he would 
go out ten miles at a time, and bring us in all the 
news of the country. Here he brought us word, that 
York was 8un*endered upon articles, and that New- 
castle, which had been surprised by the king^s party, 
was besieged by another army of Scots advanced to 
help their brethren. 

[876] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

Along the edges of those vast mountains we passed 
with the help of our guide, till we came into the 
forest of Swale ; and finding ourselves perfectly con- 
cealed here, for no soldier had ever been here all the 
war, nor perhaps would not, if it had lasted seven 
years, we thought we wanted a few days^ rest, at least 
for our horses. So we resolved to halt ; and while we 
did so, we made some disguises, and sent out some 
spies into the country ; but as here were no great 
towns, nor no post road, we got very little intelli- 
gence. We rested four days, and then marched 
again ; and indeed having no great stock of money 
about us, and not very free of that we had, four 
days was enough for those poor places to be able to 
maintain us. 

We thought ourselves pretty secure now ; but our 
chief care was how to get over those terrible moun* 
tains ; for having passed the great road that leads 
fix)m York to Lancaster, the crags, the farther north- 
ward we looked, looked still the worse, and our busi« 
ness was all on the other side. Our guide told us, 
he would bring us out, if we would have patience, 
which we were obliged to, and kept on tiiis slow 
march, till he brought us to Stanhope, in the county 
of Dui*ham ; where some of Goring'^s horse, and two 
regiments of foot, had their quarters. This was nine- 
teen days from the battle of Mai^ston Moor. The 
prince, who was then at Eendal in Westmoreland, 
and who had given me over as lost, when he had news 
of our arrival, sent an express to me, to meet him at 
Appleby. I went thither accordingly, and gave him 
an account of our journey, and there I heard the 
[877] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

short history of the other part of our men, whom we 
parted from in Lancashire. They made the best of 
their way north; they had two resolute gentlemen 
who commanded ; and being so closely pursued by the 
enemy, that they found themselves under a necessity 
of fighting, they halted, and faced about, expecting 
the chaige. The boldness of the action made the 
officer who led the enemy^s horse (which it seems 
were the county horse only) afraid of them ; which 
they perceiving, taking the advantage of liis fears, 
bravely advance, and charge them ; and, though they 
were about SOO horse, they routed them, killed about 
thirty or forty, got some horses, and some money, and 
pushed on their march night and day ; but coming 
near Lancaster, they were so waylaid and pursued, 
that they agreed to separate, and shift every man for 
himself. Many of them fell into the enemy^s hands ; 
some were killed attempting to pass through the 
river Lune ; some went back again, six or seven got 
to Bolton, and about eighteen got safe to Prince 
Rupert 

The prince was in a better condition hereabouts 
than I expected ; he and my Lord Goring, with the 
help of Sir Marmaduke Langdale,and the gentlemen 
of Cumberland, had gotten a body of 4000 horse, 
and about 6000 foot; they had retaken Newcastle, 
Tynemouth, Durham, Stockton, and several towns 
of consequence from the Scots, and might have cut 
them out work enough still, if that base people, re- 
solved to engage their whole interest to ruin their 
sovereign, had not sent a second army of 10,000 
men; under the Earl of Callander, to help their first. 
[878] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

These came and laid si^e to Newcastle, but found 
moi-e vigorous resistance now than they had done 
before. 

There were in the town Sir John Morley, the Lord 
Crawford, Lord Reay, and Maxwell, Scots ; and old 
soldiers, who were resolved their countrymen should 
buy the town very dear, if they had it ; and had it 
not been for our disaster at Marston Moor, they had 
never had it ; for Callander, finding he was not able 
to carry the town, sends to Greneral Leven to come 
from the siege of York to help him. 

Meantime the prince forms a very good army, and 
the Lord Goring, with 10,000 men, shows himself 
on the borders of Scotland, to try if that might not 
cause the Scots to recall their forces ; and, I am per- 
suaded, had he entered Scotland, the Parliament of 
Scotland had recalled the Earl of Callander, for they 
hud but 5000 men left in arms to send against him ; 
but they were loth to venture. However, this effect 
it had, that it called the Scots northward again, and 
found them work there for the rest of the summer to 
reduce the several towns in the bishopric of Durham. 

I found with the prince the poor remains of my 
regiment, which, when joined with those that had 
been with me, could not all make up three troops, 
and but two captains, three lieutenants, and one 
comet; the rest were dispersed, killed, or taken 
prisoners. However, with those, which we still called 
a regiment, I joined the prince, and after having 
done all we could on that side, the Scots being 
returned from York, the prince i*eturned through 
Lancashire to Chester. 

[279] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

The enemy often appeared and alarmed us, and 
once fell on one of our parties, and killed us about a 
hundred men ; but we were too many for them to 
pretend to fight us, so we came to Bolton, beat the 
troops of the enemy near Warrington, where I got 
a cut with a halberd in my face, and arrived at Ches* 
ter the beginning of August. 

Tiie Parliament^ upon their great success in the 
north, thinking the' king^s forces quite broken, had 
sent their [General Essex into the west, where the 
king^s army was commanded by Prince Maurice, 
Prince Rupert's elder brother, but not very strong ; 
and the king being, as they supposed, by the absence 
of Prince Rupert, weakened so much as that he might 
be checked by Sir William Waller, who, with 4500 
foot, and 1500 horse, was at that time about Win- 
chester, having lately beaten Sir Ralph Ilopton ; — 
upon all these considerations, the Earl of Essex 
marches westward. 

The forces in the west being too weak to oppose 
him, everything gave way to him, and all people ex- 
pected he would besiege Exeter, where the queen 
was newly lying-in, and sent a trumpet to desire he 
would forbear the city, while she could be removed, 
which he did, and passed on westward, took Tiver- 
ton, Bideford, Barnstaple, Launceston, relieved Ply- 
mouth, drove Sir Richard Grenvile up into Cornwall, 
and followed him thither, but left Prince Maurice 
behind him with 4000 men about Barnstaple and 
Exeter. The king in the meantime, marches fix)m 
Oxford into Worcester, with Waller at his heels. At 
Edgehill his Majesty turns upon Waller, and gave 
[280] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

him a brush, to put him in mind of the place. The 
king goes on to Worcester, sends 800 horse to relieve 
Durley Castle, besieged by the Earl of Denby, and 
sending part of his forces to Bristol, returns to Oxford. 

His Majesty had now firmly resolved to march 
into the west, not having yet any account of our 
misfortunes in the north. Waller and Middleton 
waylay the king at Cropredy Bridge. The king as- 
saults Middleton at the bridge. Waller^s men were 
posted with some cannon to guard a pass. Middle- ! 
ton's men put a regiment of the king's foot to the 
rout, and pursued them. Waller's men, willing 
to come in for the plunder, a thing their general 
had often used them to, quit their post at the pass, 
and their great guns, to have part in the victory. 
The king coming in seasonably to the relief of his 
men, routs Middleton, and at the same time sends 
a party round, who clapped in between Sir William 
Waller's men and their great guns, and secured the 
pass and the cannon too. The king took three 
colonels, besides other officers, and about 300 men 
prisoners, with eight gi'eat guns, nineteen carriages 
of ammunition, and killed about SOO men. 

Waller lost his reputation in this fight, and was 
exceedingly slighted ever after, even by his own 
party ; but especially by such as were of General 
Essex's party, between whom and Waller there had 
been jealousies and misunderstandings for some time. 

The king, about 8000 strong, marched on to 

Bristol, where Sir William Hopton joined him, and 

from thence he follows Essex into Cornwall. Essex 

still following Grenvile, the king comes to Exeter, 

[281] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

and joining with Prince Maurice, resolves to pursue 
Essex ; and now the Earl of Essex began to see his 
mistake, being cooped up between two seas, the 
king's army in his rear, the country his enemy, 
and Sir Richard Grenvile in his van. 

The king, who always took the best measures when 
he was left to his own counsel, wisely refuses to 
engage, though superior in number, and much 
stronger in horse. Essex often drew out to fight, 
but the king fortifies, takes the passes and bridges, 
plants cannon, and secures the country to keep off 
provisions, and continually straitens their quarters, 
but would not fight. 

Now Essex sends away to the Parliament for help, 
and they write to Waller, and Middleton, and Man* 
Chester to follow, and come up with the king in his 
rear ; but some were too far off, and could not, as 
Manchester and Fairfax ; others made no haste, as 
having no mind to it, as Waller and Middleton, and 
if they had, it had been too late. 

At last the Earl of Essex, finding nothing to be 
done, and unwilling to fall into the king'^s hands, 
takes shipping, and leaves his army to shift for 
themselves. The horse, under Sir William Balfour, 
the best horse officer, and, without comparison, the 
bravest in all the Parliament army, advanced in 
small parties, as if to skirmish,* but following in with 
the whole body, being 3500 horse, broke through, 
and got off. Though this was a loss to the king^s 
victory, yet the foot were now in a condition so 
much the worse. Brave old Skippon proposed to 
fight through with the foot and die^ as he called it, 
[282] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

like Englishmen, with sword in hand ; but the rest 
of the officers shook their heads at it, for, being well 
paid, they had at present no occasion for dying. 

Seeing it thus, they agreed to treat, and the king 
grants them conditions, upon laying down their arms, 
to march off free. This was too much. Had his 
Majesty but obliged them upon oath not to serve 
again for a certain time, he had done his business ; 
but this was not thought of; so they passed free, 
only disarmed, the soldiers not being allowed so much 
as their swords. 

The king gained by this treaty forty pieces of can- 
non, all of brass, 300 baiTels of gunpowder, 9000 
arms, 8000 swords, match and bullet in proportion, 
!^00 waggons, 150 colours and standards, all the bag 
and baggage of the army, and about 1000 of the men 
listed in his army. This was a complete victory 
without bloodshed ; and had the king but secured 
the men from serving but for six months, it had most 
effectually answered the battle of Mai*ston Moor. 

As it was, it infused new life into all his Majesty'^s 
forces and friends, and retrieved his affairs very 
much ; but especially it encouraged us in the north, 
who were more sensible of the blow received at 
Marston Moor, and of the destruction the Scots were 
bringing upon us all. 

While I was at Chester, we had some small skir- 
mishes with Sir William Brereton. One morning in 
particular Sir William drew up, and faced us, and 
one of our colonels of horse observing the enemy to 
be not, as he thought, above 200, desires leave of 
Prince Rupert to attack them with the like number, 
[283] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

and accordingly he sallied out with SOO horse. I 
stood drawn up without the city with 800 more, 
ready to bring him off, if he should be put to the 
worst, which happened accordingly ; for, not having 
discovered neither the country nor the enemy as he 
thought, Sir William Brereton drew him into an 
ambuscade; so that before he came up with Sir 
William'^s forces, near enough to charge, he finds 
about 300 horse in his rear. Though he was sur- 
prised at this, yet, being a man of a ready courage, 
he boldly faces about with 150 of his men, leaving 
the other fifty to face Sir William. With this small 
party, he desperately charges the 300 horse in his 
rear, and putting them into disorder, breaks through 
them, and, had there been no greater force, he had 
cut them all in pieces. Flushed with this success, 
and loth to desert the fifty men he had left behind, 
he faces about again, and charges through them 
again, and with these two charges entirely routs them. 
Sir William Brereton finding himself a little dis- 
appointed, advances, and falls upon the fifty men 
just as the colonel came up to them ; they fought 
him with a great deal of bravery, but the colonel 
being unfortunately killed in the first charge, the 
men gave way, and came flying all m confusion, with 
the enemy at their heels. As soon as I saw this, I 
advanced, according to my orders, and the enemy, as 
soon as I appeared, gave over the pursuit. This 
gentleman, as I remember, was Colonel Marrow ; we 
fetched off his body, and retreated into Chester. 

The next morning the prince drew out of the city 
with about 1200 horse and 2000 foot, and attacked 
[884] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Sir William Brereton in his quarters. The fight 
was very sharp for the time, and near 700 men, on 
both sides, were killed ; but Sir William would not 
put it to a general engagement, so the prince drew 
off, contenting himself to have insulted him in his 
quarters. 

We now had received orders from the king to join 
him ; but I representing to the prince the condition 
of my regiment, which was now 100 men, and that, 
being within twenty-five miles of my father's house, I 
might soon recruit it, my father having got some men 
together already, I desired leave to lie at Shrewsbury 
for a month, to make up my men. Accordingly, 
having obtained his leave, I marched to Wrexham, 
where in two days' time I got twenty men, and so on 
to Shrewsbury. I had not been here above ten days, 
but I received an express to come away w^ith what 
recruits I had got together. Prince Rupert having 
positive orders to meet the king by a certain day. 
I had not mounted 100 men, though I had listed 
above 200, when these orders came; but leaving 
my father to complete them for me, I marched with 
those I had and came to Oxford. 

The king, after the rout of the Parliament forces 
in the west, was marched back, took Barnstaple, 
Plympton, Launceston, Tiverton, and several other 
places, and left Plymouth besieged by Sir Richard 
Grenvile, met with Sir William Waller at Shaftes- 
bury, and again at Andover, and boxed him at both 
places, and marched for Newbury. Here the king 
sent for Prince Rupert to meet him, who with 
3000 horse made long marches to jom him ; but the 
[286] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Parliament having joined their three armies to- 
gether, Manchester from the north, Waller and 
Essex (the men being clothed and armed) from the 
west, had attacked the king, and obliged him to fight 
the day before the prince came up. 

The king had so posted himself, as that he could 
not be obliged to fight but with advantage, the 
Parliament's forces being superior in number, and 
therefore, when they attacked him, he galled them 
with his cannon, and declining to come to a general 
battle, stood upon the defensive, expecting Prince 
Rupert with the horse. 

The Parliament's forces had some advantage over 
our foot, and took the Earl of Cleveland prisoner. 
But the king, whose foot were not above one to two, 
drew his men under the cannon of Donuington Castle, 
and having secured his artillery and baggage, made a 
retreat with his foot in very good order, having not 
lost in all the fight above 300 men, and the Parlia- 
ment as many. We lost five pieces of cannon and 
took two, having repulsed the Earl of Manchester's 
men on the north side of the town, with considerable 
loss. 

The king having lodged his train of artillery and 
baggage in Donnington Castle, marched the next 
day for Oxford. There we joined him with SOOO 
horse and SOOO foot. Encouraged with this rein- 
forcement, the king appears upon the hills on the 
north-west of Newbury, and faces the Parliament 
army. The Parliament having too many generals 
as well as soldiers, they could not agree whether 
they should fight or no. This was no great token 
[286] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

of the victory they boasted of, for they were now 
twice our number in the whole, and their foot three 
for one. Tlie king stood in battalia all day, and find- 
ing the Parliament forces had no stomach to engage 
him, he drew away his cannon and baggage out of 
Donnington Castle in view of their whole army, and 
marched away to Oxford, 

This was such a false step of the Parliament's 
generals, that all the people cried shame of them. 
The Parliament appointed a committee to inquire 
into it. Cromwell accused Manchester, and he 
Waller, and so they laid the fault upon one an- 
other. Waller would have been glad to have 
charged it upon Essex, but as it happened he was 
not in the army, having been taken ill some days 
before. But as it generally is when a mistake is 
made, the actors fall out among themselves, so it 
was here. No doubt it was as false a step as that 
of Cornwall, to let the king fetch away his baggage 
and cannon in the face of three armies, and never 
fire a shot at them. 

The king had not above 8000 foot in his army, 
and they above 25,000. "Tis true the king had 
8000 horse&gt; a fine body, and much superior to 
theirs ; but the foot might, with the greatest ease 
in the world, have prevented the removing the 
cannon, and in three days' time have taken the 
castle, with all that was in it. 

Those differences produced their self-denying or- 
dinance, and the putting by most of their old 
generals, as Essex, Waller, Manchester, and the 
like; and Sir Thomas Fairfax, a terrible man in 
[287] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the field, though the mildest of men out of it, was 
voted to have the command of all their forces, 
and Lambert to take the command of Sir Thomas 
Fairfaxes troops in the north, old Skippon being 
Major-GreneraL 

This winter was spent on the enemy^s side in 
modelling, as they called it, their army, and on our 
side in recruiting ours, and some petty excursions. 
Amongst the many addresses I observed one from 
Sussex or Surrey, complaining of the rudeness of 
their soldiers, and particularly of the ravishing of 
women and the murdering of men, from which I 
only observed that there were disorders among 
them as well as among us, only with this difference, 
that they, for reasons I mentioned before, were 
under circumstances to prevent it better than the 
king. But I must do the king^s memory that 
justice, that he used all possible methods, by pun- 
ishment of soldiers, charging, and sometimes en- 
treating, the gentlemen not to suffer such disorders 
and such violences in their men ; but it was to no 
purpose for his Majesty to attempt it, while his 
officers, generals, and great men winked at it; 
for the licentiousness of the soldier is supposed 
to be approved by the officer when it is not 
corrected. 

The rudeness of the Parliament soldiers began 
from the divisions among their officers ; for in many 
places the soldiers grew so out of all discipline and 
so unsufTerably rude, that they, in particular, re- 
fused to march when Sir William Waller went to 
Weymouth. This had turned to good account 
[S88] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

for us, had these cursed Scots been out of our way, 
but they were the staff of the party ; and now they 
were daily solicited to march southward, which was 
a very great affliction to the king and all his friends. 

One booty the king got at this time, which was a 
very seasonable assistance to his affairs, viz., a great 
merchant ship, richly laden at London, and bound 
to the East Indies, was, by the seamen, brought 
into Bristol, and delivered up to the king. Some 
merchants in Bristol offered the king &lt;f 40,000 for 
her, which his Majesty ordered should be accepted, 
reserving only thirty great guns for his own use. 

The treaty at Uxbridge now was begun, and we 
that had been well beaten in the war heartily wished 
the king would come to a peace ; but we all foresaw 
the clergy would ruin it all. The Commons were 
for Presbytery, and would never agree the bishops 
should be restored. The king was willinger to 
comply with anything than this, and we foresaw 
it would be so ; from whence we used to say among 
ourselves, "That the clergy was resolved if there 
should be no bishop there should be no king.*** 

This treaty at Uxbridge was a perfect war between 
the men of the gown, ours was between those of the 
sword ; and I cannot but take notice how the lawyers, 
statesmen, and the clergy of every side bestirred them- 
selves, rather to hinder than promote the peace. 

There had been a treaty at Oxford some time be- 
fore, where the Parliament insisting that the king 
should pass a bill to abolish Episcopacy, quit the 
militia, abandon several of his faithful servants to be 
exempted from pardon, and making several other 
l» . [ 289 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

most extravagant demands, nothing was done, but 
the treaty broke off, both parties being rather farther 
exasperated, than inclined to hearken to conditions. 

However, soon after the suciress in the west, his 
Majesty, to let them see that victory had not puffed 
him up so as to make him reject the peace, sends a 
message to the Parliament, to put them in mind of 
messages of like nature which they had slighted ; and 
to let them know, that notwithstanding he had beaten 
their forces, he was yet willing to hearken to a i*eason- 
able proposal for putting an end to the war. 

The Parliament pretended the king, in his message, 
did not treat with them as a legal Pailiament, and so 
made hesitations ; but after long debates and delays 
they agreed to di'aw up propositions for peace to be 
sent to the king. As this message was sent to the 
Houses about August, I think they made it the 
middle of November before they brought the propo- 
sitions for peace ; and, when they brought them, they 
had no power to enter either upon a treaty, or so much 
as preliminaries for a treaty, only to deliver the letter, 
and receive an answer. 

However, such wei*e the circumstances of affairs at 
this time, that the king was uneasy to see himself 
thus treated, and take no notice of it : the king re- 
turned an answer to the propositions, and proposed 
a treaty by commissioners which the Parliament 
appointed. 

Three months more were spent in naming commis- 
sioners. There was much time spent in this treaty, 
but little done ; the commissioners debated chiefly the 
article of religion, and of the militia ; in the latter 
[290] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

they were very likely to agree, in the former both sides 
seemed too positive. The king would by no means 
abandon Episcopacy, nor the Parliament Presbytery ; 
for both in their opinion were Jure divino* 

The commissioners finding this point hardest to 
adjust, went from it to that of the militia ; but the 
time spinning out, the king^s commissioners demanded 
longer time for the treaty ; the other sent up for in- 
structions, but the House refused to lengthen out 
the time. 

This was thought an insolence upon the king, and 
gave all good people a detestation of such haughty 
behaviour; and thus the hopes of peace vanished, 
both sides prepared for war with as much eagerness 
as before. 

The Parliament was employed at this time in what 
they called a-modelling their army ; that is to say, 
that now the Independent party [was] beginning to 
prevail ; and, as they outdid all the others in their 
resolution of can*ying on the war to all extremities, 
so they were both the more vigorous and more politic 
party in carrying it on. 

Indeed, the war was after this carried on with 
greater animosity than ever, and the generals pushed 
forward with a vigour that, as it had something in it 
unusual, so it told us plainly from this time, whatever 
they did before, they now pushed at the ruin even of 
the monarchy itself. 

All this while also the war went on, and though 
the Parliament had no settled army, yet their regi- 
ments and troops were always in action ; and the 
sword was at work in every part of the kingdom. 
[ 291 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Among an infinite . number of party skirmishings 
and fights this winter, one happened which nearly 
concerned me, which was the surprise of the town 
and castle of Shrewsbury. Colonel Mitton, with 
about 1200 horse and foot, having intelligence with 
some people in the town, on a Sunday morning early 
broke into the town and took it, castle cmd alL The 
loss for the quality, more than the number, was very 
great to the king's affairs. They took there fifteen 
pieces of cannon, Prince Maurice's magazine of arms 
and ammunition. Prince Rupert's baggage, above 
fifty persons of quality and officers. There was not 
above eight or ten men killed on both sides, for the 
town was surprised, not stormed. I had a particular 
loss in this action ; for all the men and horses my 
father had got together for the recruiting my regi- 
ment were here lost and dispersed, and, which was 
the worse, my fitther happening to be then in the 
town, was taken prisoner, and canied to Beeston 
Castle in Cheshire. 

• I was quartered all this winter at Banbury, and 
went little abroad ; nor had we any action till the 
latter end of February, when I was ordered to march 
to Leicester with Sir Marmaduke Langdale, in order, 
as we thought, to raise a body of men in that county 
and Staffordshire to join the king. 

We lay at Daventry one night, and continuing 
our march to pass the river above Northampton, 
that town being possessed by the eniemy, we under- 
stood a party of Northampton forces were abroad, 
and intended to attack us. Accordingly, in the 
afternoon our scouts brought us word ihe enemy 
[292] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

were quartered in some villages on the road to 
Coventry, Our commander, thinking it much bettei^ 
to set upon them in their quarters, than to wait for 
them in the field, resolves to attack them early in 
the morning before they were awai^e of it. We re- 
freshed ourselves in the field for that day, and, get- 
ting into a great wood near the enemy, we stayed 
there all night, till almost break of day, without 
being discovered. 

In the morning very early we heard the enemy's 
trumpets sound to horse. This roused us to look 
abroad, and, sending out a scout, he brought us 
word a part of the enemy was at hand. We were 
vexed to be so disappointed, but finding their party 
small enough to be dealt with. Sir Marmaduke 
ordered me to charge them with 300 horse and 200 
dragoons, while he at the same time entered the 
town. Accordingly I lay still till they came to the 
very skirt of the wood where I was posted, when I 
saluted them with a volley from my dragoons out of 
the wood, and immediately showed myself with my 
horse on their front ready to charge them. They 
appeared not to be surprised, and received our charge 
with great resolution ; and, being above 400 men, 
they pushed me vigorously in their turn, putting my 
men into some disorder. In this extremity I sent 
to order my dragoons to charge them in the flank, 
which they did with great bravery, and the other 
still maintained the fight with desperate resolution. 
There was no want of courage in our men on both 
sides, but our dragoons had the advantage, and at 
last routed them, and drove them back to the village. 
[ 293 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Here Sir Marmaduke Langdale had his hands full 
too, for ray firing had alarmed the towns adjacent, 
that when he came into the town he found them all 
in arms, and, contrary to his expectation, two regi- 
ments of foot, with about 600 horse more. As Sir 
Marmaduke had no foot, only horse and dragoons, 
this was a sui*prise to him ; but he caused his dra- 
goons to enter the town and charge the foot, while 
his horse secured the avenues of the town. 

The dragoons bravely attacked the foot, and Sir 
Marmaduke falling in with his horse, the fight was 
obstinate and very bloody, when the horse that I had 
routed came flying into the street of the village, 
and my men at their heels. Immediately I left the 
pursuit, and fell in with all my force to the assistance 
of my friends, and, after an obstinate resistance, we 
routed the whole party ; we killed about 700 men, 
took 350, 27 officers, 100 arms, all their baggage, 
and 200 horses, and continued our march to Har- 
borough, where we halted to refresh ourselves. 

Between Harborough and Leicester we met with a 
party of 800 dragoons of the Parliament forces. 
They found themselves too few to attack us, and 
therefore to avoid us they had gotten into a small 
wood; but perceiving themselves discovered, they 
came boldly out, and placed themselves at the en- 
trance into a lane, lining both sides of the hedges 
with their shot. We immediately attacked them, 
beat them from their hedges, beat them into the 
wood, and out of the wood again, and forced them 
at last to a downright run away, on foot, among the 
enclosures, where we could not follow them, killed 
[294] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

about 100 of them, and took 250 prisoners, with all 
their horses, and came that night to Leicester. 
When we came to Leicester, and had taken up our 
quarters, Sir Marmaduke Langdale sent for me to 
sup with him, and told me that he had a secret 
commission in his pocket, which his Majesty had 
commanded him not to open till he came to Leicester ; 
that now he had sent for me to open it together, 
that we might know what it was we were to do, and 
to consider how to do it ; so pulling out his sealed 
orders, we found we were to get what force we could 
together, and a certain number of carriages with 
ammunition, which the governor of Leicester was to 
deliver us, and a certain quantity of provision, 
especially com and salt, and to relieve Newark. This 
town had been long besieged. The fortifications of 
the place, together with its situation, had rendered 
it the strongest piece in England ; and, as it was the 
greatest pass in England, so it was of vast consequence 
to the king'^s affairs. There was in it a garrison of 
brave old rugged boys, fellows that, like Count 
Tilly's Germans, had iron faces, and they had de- 
fended themselves with extraordinary bravery a great 
while, but were reduced to an exceeding strait for 
want of provisions. 

Accordingly we received the ammunition and pro- 
visions, and away we went for Newark ; about Melton 
Mowbray, Colonel Rossiter set upon us, with above 
3000 men ; we were about the same number, having 
2500 horse, and 800 dragoons. We had some foot, 
but they were still at Harborough, and were ordered 
to come after us. 

[295] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Rossiter, like a brave officer as he was, charged us 
with great Airy, and rather outdid us in number, 
while we defended ourselves with all the eagerness 
we could, and withal gave him to understand we were 
not so soon to be beaten as he expected. While the 
fight continued doubtful, especially on our side, our 
people, who had charge of the carriages and provi- 
sions, began to enclose our flanks with them as if we 
had been marching, which, though it was done with- 
out orders, had two very good effects, and which did 
us extraordinary service. First, it secured us from 
being charged in the flank, which Rossiter had twice 
attempted ; and secondly, it secured our carriages 
from being plundered, which had spoiled our whole 
expedition. Being thus enclosed, we fought with 
great security; and though Rossiter made three 
desperate charges upon us, he could never break us. 
Our men received him with so much courage, and 
kept their order so well, that the enemy, finding it 
impossible to force us, gave it over, and left us to 
pursue our orders. We did not offer to chase them, 
but contented enough to have repulsed and beaten 
them off^, and our business being to relieve Newark, 
we proceeded. 

If we are to reckon by the enemy's usual method, 
we got the victory, because we kept the field, and had 
the pillage of their dead ; but otherwise, neither side 
had any great cause to boast. We lost about 160 
men, and near as many hurt; they left 170 on the 
spot, and carried off some. How many they had 
wounded we could not tell ; we got seventy or eighty 
horses, which helped to remount some of our men 
[2961 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

that had lost theirs in the fight. We had, however, 
this advantage, that we were to march on imme- 
diately after this service, the enemy only to retire to 
their quarters, which was but hard by. This was 
an injury to our wounded men, who we were after 
obliged to leave at Belvoir Castle, and from thence 
we advanced to Newark. 

Our business at Newark was to relieve the place, 
and this we resolved to do whatever it cost, though, 
at the same time, we resolved not to fight unless we 
were forced to it. The town was rather blocked up 
than besieged; the garrison was strong, but ill- 
provided ; we had sent them word of our coming to 
them, and our orders to relieve them, and they 
proposed some measures for our doing it. The chief 
strength of the enemy lay on the other side of the 
river ; but they having also some notice of our design, 
had sent over forces to strengthen their leaguer on 
this side. The garrison had often surprised them 
by sallies, and indeed had chiefly subsisted for some 
time by what they brought in on this manner. 

Sir Marmaduke Langdale, who was our genei*al 
for the expedition, was for a general attempt to 
raise the siege, but I had persuaded him off of that ; 
first, because, if we should be beaten, as might be 
probable, we then lost the town. Sir Marmaduke 
briskly replied, " A soldier ought never to suppose 
he shall be beaten.^ " But, sir,'* says I, " you '11 get 
more honour by relieving the town, than by beating 
them. One will be a credit to your conduct, as the 
other will be to your courage ; and if you think you 
can beat them, you may do it afterward, and tiien 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

if you are mistaken, the town is nevertheless secured, 
and half your victory gained.'' 

He was prevailed with to adhere to this advice, 
and accordingly we appeared before the town about 
two hours before night. The horse drew up before 
the enemy's works ; the enemy drew up within their 
works, and seeing no foot, expected when our 
dragoons would dismount and attack them. They 
were in the right to let us attack them, because of 
the advantage of their batteries and works, if that 
had been our design ; but, as we intended only to 
amuse them, this caution of theirs effected our design ; 
for, while we thus faced them with our horse, two 
r^ments of foot, which came up to us but the night 
before, and was all the infantry we had, with the 
waggons of provisions, and 500 dragoons, taking a 
compass clean round the town, posted themselves on 
the lower side of the town by the river. Upon a 
signal the garrison agreed on before, they sallied out 
at this very juncture with all the men they could 
spare, and dividing themselves in two parties, while 
one party moved to the left to meet our relief, the 
other party fell on upon part of that body which 
faced us. We kept in motion, and upon this signal 
advanced to their works, and our dragoons fired 
upon them, and the horse, wheeling and counter- 
marching often, kept them continually expecting to 
be attacked. By this means the enemy were kept 
employed, and our foot, with the waggons, appear- 
ing on that quarter where they were least expected, 
easily defeated the advanced guards and forced that 
post, where, entering the leaguer, the other part of 
[298] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the garrison, who had sallied that way, came up to 
them, received the waggons, and the dragoons entered 
with them into the town. That party which we 
faced on the other side of the works knew nothing of 
what was done till all was over; the garrison re- 
treated in good order, and we drew off, having 
finished what we came for without fighting. Thus 
we plentifully stored the town with all things want- 
ing, and with an addition of 500 dragoons to their 
garrison ; after which we marched away without 
fighting a stroke. 

Our next orders were to relieve Pontefract Castle, 
another garrison of the king's, which had been be- 
sieged ever since a few days after the battle at 
Marston Moor, by the Lord Fairfax, Sir Thomas 
Fairfax, and other generals in their turn. By the 
way we were joined with 800 horse out of Derby- 
shire, and some foot, so many as made us about 
4500 men in all. 

Colonel Forbes, a Scotchman, commanded at the 
siege, in the absence of the Lord Fairfax. The 
colonel had sent to my lord for more troops, and his 
lordship was gathering his forces to come up to him, 
but he was pleased to come too late. We came up 
with the enemy's leaguer about the break of day, 
and having been discovered by their scouts, they, 
with more courage than discretion, drew out to 
meet us. We saw no reason to avoid them, being 
stronger in horse than they ; and though we had 
but a few foot, we had 1000 dragoons, which helped 
us out. We had placed our horse and foot through- 
out in one line, with two reserves of horse, and 
[299] . 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

between every division of horse a division of foot, 
only that on the extremes of our wings there were 
two parties of horse on each point by themselves, 
and the dragoons in the centre on foot Their foot 
charged us home, and stood with push of pike a 
great while ; but their horse charging our horse 
and musketeei's, and being closed on the flanks, with 
those two extended troops on our wings, they were 
presently disordered, and fled out of the field. The 
foot, thus deserted, were charged on every side and 
broken. They retreated still fighting, and in good 
order for a while; but the garrison sallying upon 
them at the same time, and being followed close by 
our horse, they were scattered, entirely routed, and 
most of them killed. The Lord Fairfax was come 
with his horse as far as Ferrybridge, but the fight 
was over, and all he could do was to rally those that 
fled, and save some of their carriages, which else had 
fallen into our hands. We drew up our little army 
in order of battle the next day, expecting the Lord 
Fairfax would have charged us ; but his lordship was 
so far from any such thoughts that he placed a party 
of dragoons, with orders to fortify the pass at Ferry- 
bridge, to prevent our falling upon him in his retreat, 
which he needed not have done ; for, having raised 
the siege of Pontefract, our business was done, we 
had nothing to say to him, unless we had been 
strong enough to stay. 

We lost not above thirty men in this action, and 

the enemy 800, with about 160 prisoners, one piece 

of cannon, all their ammunition, 1000 arms, and 

most of their baggage, and Colonel Lambert was 

[800] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

once taken prisoner, being iirounded, but got off 
again. 

We brought no relief for the garrison, but the 
opportunity to fuiTiish themselves out of the country, 
which they did very plentifully. The ammunition 
taken from the enemy was given to them, which 
they wanted, and was their due, for they had seized 
it in the sally they made, before the enemy was 
quite defeated, 

I cannot omit taking notice on all occasions how 
exceeding serviceable this method was of posting 
musketeers in the intervals, among the horse, in all 
this war. I persuaded our generals to it as much as 
possible, and I never knew a body of horse beaten 
that did so; yet I had great difficulty to prevail 
upon our people to believe it, though it was taught 
me by the greatest general in the world, viz., the 
King of Sweden. Prince Rupert did it at the battle 
of Marston Moor ; and had the Earl of Newcastle 
not been obstinate against it in his right wing, as I 
observed before, the day had not been lost. In dis- 
coursing this with Sir Marmaduke Langdale, I had 
related several examples of the serviceableness of 
these small bodies of firemen, and with great diffi- 
culty brought him to agree, telling him I would be 
answerable for the success. But after the fight, he 
told me plainly he saw the advantage of it, and 
would never fight otherwise again if he had any foot 
to place. So having relieved these two places, we 
hastened by long marches through Derbyshire, to 
join Prince Rupert on the edge of Shropshire and 
Cheshire. We found Colonel Rossiter had followed 
[301] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

us at a distance ever since the business at Melton 
Mowbray, but never cared to attack us, and we 
found he did the like still. Our general would fitin 
have been doing with him again, but we found him 
too shy. Once we laid a trap for him at Dovebridge, 
between Derby and Burton-upon-Trent, the body 
being marched two days before. Three hundred 
dragoons were left to guard the bridge, as if we 
were afraid he should fall upon us. Upon this we 
marched, as I said, on to Burton, and the next day, 
fetching a compass round, came to a village near 
Titbury Castle, whose name I forgot, where we lay 
still expecting our dragoons would be attacked. 

Accordingly, the colonel, strengthened with some 
troops of horse from Yorkshire, comes up to the 
bridge, and finding some dragoons posted, advances 
to charge them. The dragoons immediately get 
a-horseback, and run for it, as they were ordered. 
But the old lad was not to be caught so, for he 
halts immediately at the bridge, and would not come 
over till he had sent three or four flying parties 
abroad to discover the country. One of these parties 
fell into our hands, and received but coarse enter- 
tainment. Finding the plot would not take, we ap- 
peared and drew up in view of the bridge, but he 
would not stir. So we continued our march into 
Cheshire, where we joined Prince Rupert and Prince 
Maurice, making together a fine body, being above 
8000 horse and dragoons. 

This was the best and most successful expedition 
I was in during this war. TT was well concerted, and 
executed with as much expedition and conduct as 
[802] , 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

could be desired, and the success was answerable to 
it. And indeed, considering the season of the year 
(for we set out from Oxford the latter end of Feb- 
ruary), the ways bad, and the season wet, it was a 
terrible march of above SOO miles, in continual 
action, and continually dodged and observed by a 
vigilant enemy, and at a time when the north was 
overrun by their armies, and the Scots wanting 
employment for their forces. Yet in less than 
twenty-three days we marched 200 miles, fought the 
enemy in open field four times, relieved one garrison 
besieged, and raised the siege of another, and joined 
our friends at last in safety. 

The enemy was in great pain for Sir William 
Brereton and his forces, and expresses rode night and 
day to the Scots in the north, and to the parties in 
Lancashire to come to his help. The prince, who 
used to be rather too forward to fight than other- 
wise, could not be persuaded to make use of this 
opportunity, but loitered, if I may be allowed to say 
so, till the Scots, with a brigade of horse and 2000 
foot, had joined him ; and then 't was not thought 
proper to engage them. 

I took this opportunity to go to Shrewsbury to 
visit my father, who was a prisoner of war there, get- 
ting a pass from the enemy's governor. They allowed 
him the liberty of the town, and sometimes to go to 
his own house upon his parole, so that his confinement 
was not very much to his personal injury. But this, 
together with the charges he had been at in raising 
the regiment, and above ^0,000 in money and 
plate, which at several times he had lent, or given 
[803] / 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

rather to the king, had reduced our family to very 
ill circumstances ; and now they talked of cutting 
down his woods. 

I had a great deal of discourse with my father on 
this affair ; and, finding him extremely concerned, I 
offered to go to the king and desire his leave to 
go to London and treat about his composition, 
or to render myself a prisoner in his stead, while he 
went up himself. In this difficulty I treated with 
the governor of the town, who very civilly offered 
me his pass to go for London, which I accepted, 
and, waiting on Prince Rupert, who was then at 
Worcester, I acquainted him with my design. The 
prince was unwilling I should go to London; but 
told me he had some prisoners of the Parliament's 
friends in Cumberland, and he would get an exchange 
for my father. I told him if he would give me his 
word for it I knew I might depend upon it, other- 
wise there was so many of the king's party in their 
hands, that his Majesty was tired with solicitations 
for exchanges, for we never had a prisoner but there 
was ten offers of exchanges for him. The prince 
told me I should depend upon him ; and he was as 
good as his word quickly after. 

While the prince lay at Worcester he had an in- 
cursion into Herefordshire, and having made some 
of the gentlemen prisoners, brought them to Wor- 
cester ; and though it was an action which had not 
been usual, they being persons not in arms, yet the 
like being my father's case, who was really not in 
commission, nor in any military service, having 
resigned his regiment three years before to me, the 
[S04] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

prince insisted on exchanging them for such as the 
Parliament had in custody in like circumstances. 
The gentlemen seeing no remedy, solicited their own 
case at the Parliament, and got it passed in their 
behalf; and by this means my father got his liberty, 
and by the assistance of the Earl of Denbigh got 
leave to come to London to make a composition as a 
delinquent for his estate. This they charged at 
«£^7000, but by the assistance of the same noble per- 
son he got off for «£^4000. Some members of the 
committee moved very kindly that my father should 
oblige me to quit the king^s service, but that, as a 
thing which might be out of his power, was not 
insisted on. 

The modelling the Parliament army took them 
up all this winter, and we were in great hopes the 
divisions which appeared amongst them might have 
weakened their party; but when they voted Sir 
Thomas Fairfax to be general, I confess I was con- 
vinced the king'^s afiairs were lost and desperate. 
Sir Thomas, abating the zeal of his party, and the 
mistaken opinion of his cause, was the fittest man 
amongst them to undertake the charge. He was a 
complete general, strict in his discipline, wary in 
conduct, fearless in action, unwearied in the fatigue 
of the war, and withal, of a modest, noble, generous 
disposition. We all apprehended danger from him, 
and heartily wished him of our own side ; and the 
king was so sensible, though he would not discover 
it, that when an account was brought him of the 
choice they had made, he replied, " he was sorry for 
it ; he had rather it had been anybody but he.^ 
«o [ 805 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

The first attempts of this new general and new 
army were at Oxford, which, by the neighbourhood 
of a numerous garrison in Abingdon, began to be 
very much straitened for provisions; and the new 
forces under Cromwell and Skippon, one lieutenant- 
general, the other major-general to Fairfax, approach- 
ing with a design to block it up, the king left the 
place, supposing his absence would draw them away, 
as it soon did. 

The king resolving to leave Oxford, marches fi'om 
thence with all his forces, the garrison excepted, with 
design to have gone to Bristol ; but the plague was 
in Bristol, which altered the measures, and changed 
the course of the king*s designs, so he marched for 
Worcester about the beginning of June 1645. The 
foot, with a train of forty pieces of cannon, marching 
into Worcester, the horse stayed behind some time 
in Gloucestershire, 

The first action our army did, was to raise the 
siege of Chester ; Sir William Brereton had besieged 
it, or rather blocked it up, and when his Majesty came 
to Worcester, he sent Prince Rupert with 4000 horse 
and dragoons, with orders to join some foot out of 
Wales, to raise the siege ; but Sir William thought 
fit to withdraw, and not stay for them, and the town 
was freed without fighting. The governor took care 
in this interval to furnish himself with all things 
necessary for another siege ; and, as for ammunition 
and other necessaiies, he was in no want. 

I was sent with a party into Staffordshire, with 
design to intercept, a convoy of stores coming from 
London, for the use of Sir William Brereton; but 
[806] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

they having some notice of the design, stopped, and 
went out of the road to Burton-upon-Trent, and so 
I missed them ; but that we might not come back 
quite empty, we attacked Hawkesley House, and took 
it, where we got good booty, and brought eighty 
prisoners back to Worcester. From Worcester the 
king advanced into Shropshire, and took his head- 
quarters at Bridgnorth. This was a very happy 
march of the king's, and had his Majesty proceeded, 
he had certainly cleared the north once more of his 
enemies, for the country was generally for him. At 
his advancing so far as Bridgnorth, Sir William 
Brereton fled up into Lancashire ; the Scots brigades 
who were with him retreated into the north, while 
yet the king was above forty miles from them, and 
all things lay open for conquest. The new generals, 
Fairfax and Cromwell, lay about Oxford, preparing 
as if they would besiege it, and gave the king's army 
so much leisure, that his Majesty might have been at 
Newcastle before they could have been half way to 
him. But Heaven, when the ruin of a person or party 
is determined, always so infatuates their counsels as 
to make them instrumental to it themselves. 

The king let slip this great opportunity, as some 
thought, intending to break into the associated coun- 
ties of Northampton, Cambridge, Norfolk, where he 
had some interests forming. What the design was, we 
knew not, but the king turns eastward, and marches 
into Leicestershire, and having ti*eated the country 
but very indifferently, as having deserved no better 
of us, laid siege to Leicester. 

This was but a short siege ; for the king, resolving 
[807] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

not to lose time^ fell on with his great guns, and hav* 
ing beaten down their works, our foot entered, after 
a vigorous resistance, and took the town by storm* 
There was some blood shed here, the town being 
carried by assault ; but it was their own faults ; for 
after the town was taken, the soldiers and townsmen 
obstinately fought us in the market-place ; insomuch 
that the horse was called to enter the town to clear 
the streets. But this was not all ; I was commanded 
to advance with these horse, being three regiments, 
and to enter the town ; the foot, who were engaged 
in the streets, crying out, " Horse, horse.'' Immedi- 
ately I advanced to the gate, for we were drawn up 
about musket-shot from the works, to have supported 
our foot in case of a sally. Having seized the gate, 
I placed a guard of horse there, with orders to let 
nobody pass in or out, and dividing my troops, rode 
up by two ways towards the market-place. The 
garrison defending themselves in the market-place 
and in the churchyard with great obstinacy, killed 
us a great many men ; but as soon as our horse ap- 
peared they demanded quarter, which our foot refused 
them in the first heat, as is frequent in all nations, in 
like cases, till at last they threw down their arms, 
and yielded at discretion ; and then I can testify to 
the world, that fair quarter was given them. I am 
the more particular in this relation, having been 
an eye-witness of the action, because the king was 
reproached in all the public libels, with which those 
times abounded, for having put a great many "to 
death, and hanged the committee of the Parliament, 
and some Scots, in cold blood, which was a notorious 
[808] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

forgery ; and as I am sure there was no such thing 
done, so I must acknowledge I never saw any inclina- 
tion in his Majesty to cruelty, or to act anything 
which was not practised by the general laws of war, 
and by men of honour in all nations* 

But the matter of fact, in respect to the garrison, 
was as I have related ; and, if they had thrown 
down their arms sooner, they had had mercy sooner ; 
but it was not for a conquering army, entering a 
town by storm, to offer conditions of quarter in the 
streets. 

Another circumstance was,'"that a great many of 
the inhabitants, both men and women, were killed, 
which is most true ; and the case was thus : the in- 
habitants, to show their over-forward zeal to defend 
the town, fought in the breach ; nay, the very 
women, to the honour of the Leicester ladies, if they 
like it, officiously did their parts ; and after the town 
was taken, and when, if they had had any brains in 
their zeal, they would have kept their houses, and 
been quiet, they fired upon ourlnen out of their 
windows, and from the tops of their houses, and 
threw tiles upon their heads ; and I had several of 
my men wounded so, and seven or eight killed. 
This exasperated us to the last degree ; and, finding 
one house better manned than ordinary, and many 
shot fired at us out of the windows, I caused my men 
to attack it, resolved to make them an example for 
the rest; which they did, and breaking open the 
doors, they killed all they found there, without dis- 
tinction ; and I appeal to the world if they were to 
blame. If the Parliament committee, or the Scots 
[ 809 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

deputies were here, they ought to have been quiet, 
since the town was taken ; but they began with us, 
and, I think, brought it upon themselves. This is 
the whole case, so far as came within ray knowledge, 
for which his Majesty was so much abused. 

We took here Colonel Gray and Captain Hacker, 
and about 300 prisoners, and about 300 more were 
killed. This was the last day of May 1645. 

His Majesty having given over Oxford for lost, 
continued here some days, reviewed the town, ordered 
the fortifications to be augmented, and prepares to 
make it the seat of war. But the Parliament, roused 
at this appearance of the king^s army, orders their 
general to liaise the siege of Oxford, where the garri- 
son had, in a sally, ruined some of their works, and 
killed them 150 men, taking several prisoners, and 
carrying them with them into the city ; and orders 
him to march towards Leicester, to observe the king. 

The king had now a small, but gallant army, all 
brave tried soldiei*s, and seemed eager to engage the 
new-modelled army ; and his Majesty, hearing that 
Sir Thomas Fairfax, having raised the siege of Ox- 
ford, advanced towards him, fajrly saves him the 
trouble of a long march, and meets him half way. 

The army lay at Daventry, and Fairfax at Tow- 
cester, about eight miles off. Here the king sends 
away 600 horse, with 3000 head of cattle, to relieve 
his people in Oxford ; the cattle he might have spared 
better than the men. The king having thus victualled 
Oxford, changes his resolution of fighting Fairfax, to 
whom Cromwell was now joined with 4000 men, or 
was within a day^s march, and marches northward. 
[810]i 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

This was unhappy counsel, because late given. Had 
we marched northward at first, we had done it ; but 
thus it was. Now we marched with a triumphing 
enemy at our heels, and at Naseby their advanced 
parties attacked our rear. The king, upon this, 
alters his resolution again, and resolves to fight, and 
at midnight calls us up at Harborough to come to a 
council of war. Fate and the king^s opinion deter- 
mined the council of war ; and 't was resolved to fight. 
Accordingly the van, in which was Prince Rupert's 
brigade of horse, of which my regiment was a part, 
countermarched early in the morning. 

By five o'clock in the morning, the whole army, in 
order of battle, began to descry the enemy from the 
rising grounds, about a mile from Naseby, and moved 
towards them. They were drawn up on a little 
ascent in a large common fallow field, in one line 
extended from one side of the field to the other, the 
field something more than a mile over, our army in 
the same order, in one line, with the reserve. 

The king led the main battle of foot, Prince 
Rupert the right wing of the horse, and Sir Marma- 
duke Langdale the left. Of the enemy Fairfax and 
Skippon led the body, Cromwell and Rossiter the 
right, and Ireton the left, the numbers of both armies 
so equal, as not to difier 600 men, save that the king 
had most horse by about 1000, and Fairfax most 
foot by about 600. The number was in each army 
about 18,000 men. 

The armies coming close up, the wings engaged 
first. The prince with his right wing charged with 
his wonted fury, and drove all the Parliament's wing 
[811] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

of horse, one division excepted, clear out of the field ; 
Ireton, who commanded this wing, give him his due, 
rallied often, and fought like a lion ; but our wing 
bore down all before them, and pursued them with a 
terrible execution. 

Ireton seeing one division of his horse left, repaired 
to them, and keeping his ground, fell foul of a bri- 
gade of our foot, who coming up to the head of the 
line, he like a madman charges them with his horse. 
But they with their pikes tore him to pieces ; so that 
this division was entirely ruined. Ireton himself, 
thrust through the thigh with a pike, wounded in 
the face with a halberd, was unhorsed and taken 
prisoner. 

Cromwell, who commanded the Parliament's right 
wing, charged Sir Marmaduke Langdale with ex- 
traordinary fury, but he, an old tried soldier, stood 
firm, and i*eceived the charge with equal gallantry, 
exchanging all their shot, carabines and pistols, and 
then fell on sword in hand. Rossiter and Whalley 
had the better on the point of the wing, and routed 
two divisions of horse, pushed them behind the 
reserves, where they rallied and charged again, but 
were at last defeated ; the rest of the horse, now 
charged in the flank, retreated fighting, and were 
pushed behind the reserves of foot. 

While this was doing the foot engaged with equal 
fierceness, and for two hours there was a terrible fire. 
The king'^s foot, backed with gallant officers, and full 
of rage at the rout of their horse, bore down the 
enem)''s brigade led by Skippon. The old man, 
wounded, bleeding, retreats to their reserves. All 
[812] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the foot, except the general^s brigade, were thus 
driven into the reserves, where their officers rallied 
them, and bring them on to a fresh charge ; and here 
the horse, having driven our horse above a quarter of 
a mile from the foot, face about, and fall in on the 
rear of the foot. 

Had our right wing done thus, the day had been 
secured ; but Prince Rupert, according to his custom, 
following the flying enemy, never concerned himself 
with the safety of those behind ; and yet he returned 
sooner than he had done in like cases too. At our 
return we found all in confusion, our foot broken, 
all but one brigade, which, though charged in the 
front, flank, and rear, could not be broken till Sir 
Thomas Fairfax himself came up to the charge 
with fresh men, and then they were rather cut in 
pieces than beaten, for they stood with their pikes 
charged every way to the last extremity. 

In this condition, at the distance of a quarter of 
a mile, we saw the king rallying his horse, and 
preparing to renew the fight; and our wing of 
horse coming up to him, gave him opportunity to 
draw up a large body of horse, so large that all 
the enemy^'s horse facing us stood still and looked 
on, but did not think fit to charge us till their foot, 
who had entirely broken our main battle, were put 
into order again, and brought up to us. 

The officers about the king advised his Majesty 
rather to draw ofi^; for, since our foot were lost, 
it would be too much odds to expose the horse to 
the fury of their whole army, and would but be 
sacrificing his best troops without any hopes of 
[313] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

success. The king, though with great regret at 
the loss of his foot, yet seeing there was no other 
hope, took this advice, and retreated in good order 
to Harborough, and from thence to Leicester* 

This was the occasion of the enemy having so 
great a number of prisoners; for the horse being 
thus gone off, the foot had no means to make their 
retreat, and were obliged to yield themselves. Com- 
missary-Greneral Ireton being taken by a captain of 
foot, makes the captain his prisoner, to save his 
life, and gives him his liberty for his courtesy 
before. 

Cromwell and Rossiter, with all the enemy^s 
horse, followed us as far as Leicester, and killed all 
that they could lay hold on straggling from the 
body, but durst not attempt to charge us in a body. 
The king, expecting the enemy would come to 
Leicester, removes to Ashby-de-la-Zouch, where we 
had some time to re-collect ourselves. 

This was the most fatal action of the whole war, 
not so much for the loss of our cannon, ammunition, 
and baggage, of which the enemy boasted so much, 
but as it was impossible for the king ever to re- 
trieve it. The foot, the best that ever he was 
master of, could never be supplied ; his army in the 
west was exposed to certain ruin, the north over- 
run with the Scots ; in short, the case grew des- 
perate, and the king was once upon the point of 
bidding us all disband, and shift for ourselves. 

We lost in this fight not above SOOO slain, and 
the Parliament near as many, but the prisoners 
were a great number ; the whole body of foot being, 
[814] 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



AlTEll THE BATTLE OF NASEBY 



J II the enemi/s horsey followed ujf as far as Leicester^ 
and killed all that they could lay hold on 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Googk 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

as I have said, dispersed, there were 4600 prisoners, 
besides 400 officers, 2000 horses, 12 pieces of cannon, 
40 barrels of powder, all the king^s baggage, coaches, 
most of his servants, and his secretary, with his 
cabinet of letters, of which the Parliament made 
great improvement, and basely enough caused his 
private letters — between his Majesty and the 
queen, her Majesty's letters to the king, and a 
great deal of such stuff — to be printed. 

After this fatal blow, being retreated, as I have 
said, to Ashby-de-la-Zouch in Leicestershire, the 
king ordered us to divide ; his Majesty, with a body 
of horse, about 8000, went to Lichfield, and through 
Cheshire into North Wales, and Sir Mai*maduke 
Langdale, with about 2500, went to Newark. 

The king remained in Wales for several months ; 
and though the length of the war had almost 
drained that country of men, yet the king raised a 
great many men there, recruited his horse regiments, 
and got together six or seven regiments of foot, 
which seemed to look like the beginning of a new 
army. 

I had frequent discourses with his Majesty in this 
low ebb of his affairs, and he would often wish he 
had not exposed his army at Naseby. I took the 
freedom once to make a proposition to his Majesty, 
which, if it had taken effect, I verily believe would 
have given a new turn to his affairs ; and that was, 
at once to slight all his garrisons in the kingdom, 
and give private orders to all the soldiers in every 
place, to join in bodies, and meet at two general 
rendezvous, which I would have appointed to be, 
[316] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

one at Bristol, and one at West Chester. I demon- 
strated how easily all the forces might reach these 
two places ; and both being strong and wealthy 
places, and both seaports, he would have a free com- 
munication by sea with Ireland, and with his friends 
abroad; and having Wales entirely his own, he 
might yet have an opportunity to make good terms 
for himself, or else have another fair field with the 
enemy. 

Upon a fair calculation of bis troops in several 
garrisons and small bodies dispersed about, I con- 
vinced the king, by his own accounts, that he might 
have two complete armies, each of S5,000 foot, 
8000 horse, and SOOO dragoons; that the Lord 
Goring and the Lord Hopton might ship all their 
forces, and come by sea in two tides, and be with 
him in a shorter time than the enemy could follow. 
With two such bodies he might face the enemy, and 
make a day of it ; but now his men were only sacri- 
ficed, and eaten up by piecemeal in a party-war, and 
spent their lives and estates to do him no service. 
That if the Parliament garrisoned the towns and 
castles he should quit, they would lessen their army, 
and not dare to see him in the field ; and if they did 
not, but left them open, then ^t would be no loss to 
him, but he might possess them as often as he 
pleased. 

This advice I pressed with such arguments, that 
the king was once going to despatch orders for the 
doing it ; but to be irresolute in counsel is always 
the companion of a declining fortune ; the king was 
doubtful and could not resolve until it was too late. 
[S16] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

And yet, though the king^s forces were very low, 
his Majesty was resolved to make one adventure 
more, and it was a strange one ; for, with but a 
handful of men, he made a desperate march, almost 
260 miles in the middle of the whole kingdom, com- 
passed about with armies and parties innumerable, 
traversed the heart of his cncmy'*s country, entered 
their associated counties, where no army had ever 
yet come, and in spite of all their victorious troops 
facing and following him, alarmed even London 
itself and returned safe to Oxford. 

His Majesty continued in Wales from the battle 
at Naseby till the 5th or 6th of August, and till he 
had an account from all parts of the progress of his 
enemies, and the posture of his own affairs. 

Here we found, that the enemy being hard pressed 
in Somersetshire by the Lord Goring, and Lord 
Hopton^s forces, who had taken Bridgewater, and 
distressed Taunton, which was now at the point of 
surrender, they had ordered Fairfax and Cromwell, 
and the whole army, to march westward to relieve 
the town ; which they did, and Groring's troops 
were worsted, and himself wounded at the fight at 
Langport. 

The Scots, who were always the dead weight upon 
the king^s affairs, having no more work to do in the 
north, were, at the Parliament's desire, advanced 
southward, and then ordered away towards South 
Wales, and were set down to the siege of Hereford. 
Here this famous Scotch army spent several months 
in a fruitless siege, ill provided of ammunition, and 
woi*se with money ; and having sat near three 
[317] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

months before the town, and done little but eaten 
up the country round them, upon the repeated 
accounts of the progress of the Marquis of Montrose 
in that kingdom, and pressing instances of their 
countrymen, they resolved to raise their si^e, and 
go home to relieve their friends. 

The king, who was willing to be rid of the Scots, 
upon good teims, and therefore to hasten them, and 
lest they should pretend to push on the siege to take 
the town first, gives it out, that he was resolved with 
all his forces to go into Scotland, and join Montrose ; 
and so having secured Scotland, to renew the war 
from thence. 

And accordingly his Majesty marches northwards, 
with a body of 4000 horse ; and, had the king really 
done this, and with that body of horse marched away 
(for he had the start of all his enemies, by above a 
fortnight's march), he had then had the fairest oppor- 
tunity for a general turn of all his affairs, that he ever 
had in all the latter part of this war. For Montrose, 
a gallant daring soldier, who from the least shadow 
of force in the farthest comer of this country, had, 
rolling like a snowball, spread all over Scotland, was 
come into the south parts, and had summoned Edin- 
burgh, frighted away their statesmen, beaten their 
soldiers at Dundee and other places ; and letters and 
messengers in the heels of one another, repeated their 
cries to their brethren in England, to lay before them 
the sad condition of the country, and to hasten the 
army to their relief. The Scots lords of the enemy's 
party fled to Berwick, and the chancellor of Scotland 
goes himself to General Leslie, to press him for help. 
[318] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

In this extremity of affairs Scotland lay when we 
marched out of Wales. The Scots, at the siege of 
Hereford, hearing the king was gone northward with 
his horse, conclude he was gone directly for Scotland, 
and immediately send Leslie with 4000 horse and foot 
to follow, but did not yet raise the siege. But the 
king, still iiTesolute, turns away to the eastward, 
and comes to Lichfield, where he showed his resent- 
ments at Colonel Hastings for his easy surrender of 
Leicester. 

In this march the enemy took heart. We had 
troops of horse on every side upon us like hounds 
started at a fresh stag. Leslie, with the Scots, and 
a strong body followed in our rear, Major-General 
Poyntz, Sir John Gell, Colonel Rossiter, and others 
in our way ; they pretended to be 10,000 horse, and 
yet never durst face us. The Scots made one attempt 
upon a troop which stayed a little behind, and took 
some prisoners ; but when a regiment of our horse 
faced them they retired. At a village near Lichfield 
another party of about 1000 horse attacked my regi- 
ment. We were on the left of the army, and at a 
little too far a distance. I happened to be with the 
king at that time, and my lieutenant-colonel with me, 
so that the major had charge of the regiment. He 
made a very handsome defence, but sent messengers 
for speedy relief. We were on a march, and there- 
fore all ready, and the king orders me a regiment of 
dragoons and 300 horse, and the body halted to bring 
us off, not knowing how strong the enemy might be. 
When I came to the place I found my major hard 
laid to, but fighting like a lion. The enemy had 
[319] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

broke in upon him in two places, and had routed one 
troop, cutting them off from the body, and had made 
them all prisoners. Upon this I fell in with the 
300 horse, and cleared my major from a party who 
charged him in the flank ; the dragoons immediately 
lighting, one party of them comes up on my wing, 
and saluting the enemy with their muskets, put them 
to a stand, the other party of dragoons wheeling to the 
left endeavouring to get behind them. The enemy, 
perceiving they should be overpowered, retreated in 
as good order as they could, but left us most of our 
prisoners, and about thirty of their own. We lost 
about fifteen of our men, and the enemy about forty, 
chiefly by the fire of our dragoons in their retreat. 

In this posture we continued our march ; and 
though the king halted at Lichfield — which was a 
dangerous article, having so many of the enemy^s 
troops upon his hands, and this time gave them 
opportunity to get into a body — yet the Scots, with 
their General Leslie, resolving for the north, the 
rest of the troops were not able to face us, till, hav- 
ing ravaged the enemy's country through Stafford- 
shire, Warwick, Leicester, and Nottinghamshire, we 
came to the leaguer before Newark. 

The king was once more in the mind to have gone 
into Scotland, and called a council of war to that 
purpose ; but then it was resolved by all hands that 
it would be too late to attempt it, for the Scots and 
Major-General Poyntz were before us, and several 
strong bodies of horse in our rear ; and there was no 
venturing now, unless any advantage presented to 
rout one of those parties which attended us. 
[ 820 ] ' 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Upon these and like considerations we resolved for 
Newark ; on our approach the forces which blocked 
up that town drew off, being too weak to oppose us, 
for the king was now above 5000 horse and dragoons, 
besides 300 horse and dragoons he took with him 
from Newark. 

We halted at Newark to assist the garrison, or 
give them time rather to furnish themselves from 
the country with what they wanted, which they were 
very diligent in doing ; for in two days' time they 
filled a large island which lies under the town, be- 
tween the two branches of the Trent, with sheep, 
oxen, cows, and horses, an incredible number ; and 
our affairs being now something desperate, we were 
not very nice in our usage of the country, for really 
if it was not with a resolution both to punish 
the enemy and enrich ourselves, no man can give any 
rational account why this desperate journey was 
undertaken. Tis certain the Newarkers, in the 
respite they gained by our coming, got above ,£60,000 
from the country round them in com, cattle, money, 
and other plunder. 

From hence we broke into Lincolnshire, and the 
king lay at Belvoir Castle, and from Belvoir Castle to 
Stamford. The swiftness of our march was a terrible 
surprise to the enemy ; for our van being at a village 
on the great road called Stilton, the country people 
fled into the Isle of Ely, and every way, as if all was 
lost. Indeed our dragoons treated the country very 
coarsely, and all our men in general made themselves 
rich. Between Stilton and Huntingdon we had a 
small bustle with some of the associated troops of 
«1 [ 821 ] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

horse, but they were soon routed, and fled to Hunt- 
ingdon, where they gave such an account of us to 
their fellows that they did not think fit to stay for 
us, but left their foot to defend themselves as well 
as they could. 

While this was doing in the van a party from 
Burleigh House, near Stamford, the seat of the Earl 
of Exeter, pursued four troops of our horse, who, 
straggling towards Peterborough, and committing 
some disorders there, were surprised before they could 
get into a postiue of fighting ; and encumbered, as 
I suppose, with their plunder, they were entirely 
routed, lost most of their horses, and were forced to 
come away on foot ; but finding themselves in this 
condition, they got in a body into the enclosures, 
and in that posture turning dragoons, they lined the 
hedges, and fired upon the enemy with their carabines. 
This way of fighting, though not very pleasant to 
troopers, put the enemy^s horse to some stand, and 
encouraged our men to venture into a village, where 
the enemy had secured forty of their horse; and 
boldly charging the guard, they beat them ofi^, and 
recovering those horses, the rest made their retreat 
good to Wansford Bridge; but we lost near 100 
horses, and about twelve of our men taken prisoners* 

The next day the king took Huntingdon ; the foot 
which were left in the town, &amp;s I observed by their 
horse, had posted themselves at the foot of the bridge, 
and fortified the pass, with such things as the haste 
and shortness of the time would allow ; and in this 
posture they seemed resolute to defend themselves. 
I confess, had they in time planted a good force 
[8SS] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

here, they might have put a full stop to our little 
army ; for the river is large and deep, the country on 
the left marshy, full of drains and ditches, and unfit 
for horse, and we must have either turned haxkj or 
took the right hand into Bedfordshire ; but here not 
being above 400 foot, and they forsaken of their 
horse, the resistance they made was to no other 
purpose than to give us occasion to knock them on 
the head, and plunder the town. 

However, they defended the bridge, as I have 
said, and opposed our passage. I was this day in 
the van, and our forlorn having entered Huntingdon 
without any great resistance till they came to the 
bridge, finding it barricaded, they sent me word ; I 
caused the troops to halt, and rode up to the forlorn, 
to view the countenance of the enemy, and found by 
the posture they had put themselves in, that they 
resolved to sell us the passage as dear as they could. 

I sent to the king for some dragoons, and gave 
him account of what I observed of the enemy, and 
that I judged them to be 1000 men ; for I could 
not particularly see their numbers. Accordingly 
the king ordered 500 dragoons to attack the bridge, 
commanded by a major ; the enemy had SOO musket- 
eers placed on the bridge, their barricade served them 
for a breastwork on the front, and the low walls on 
the bridge served to secure their flanks. Two bodies 
of their foot were placed on the opposite banks of the 
river, and a reserve stood in the highway on the rear. 
The number of their men could not have been better 
ordered, and they wanted not coiu*age answerable 
to the conduct of the party. They were com- 
[823] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

manded by one Bennet, a resolute officer, who 
stood in the front of his men on the bridge with a 
pike in his hand. 

Before we began to fall on, the king ordered to 
view the river, to see if it was nowhere passable, or 
any boat to be had ; but the river being not fordable, 
and the boats all secured on the other side, the at- 
tack was resolved on, and the dragoons fell on with 
extraordinary bravery. The foot defended them- 
selves obstinately, and beat off our dragoons twice, 
and though Bennet was killed upon the spot, and 
after him his lieutenant, yet their officers relieving 
them with fresh men, they would certainly have 
beat us all off, had not a venturous fellow, one of 
our dragoons, thrown himself into the river, swam 
over, and, in the midst ofa shower of musket-bullets, 
cut the rope which tied a great flat-bottom boat, and 
brought her over. With the help of this boat, I got 
over 100 troopers first, and then their horses, and 
then 200 more without their horses ; and with this 
party fell in with one of the small bodies of foot 
that were posted on that side, and having routed 
them, and after them the reserve which stood on the 
road, I made up to the other party. They stood 
their ground, and having rallied the runaways of 
both the other parties, charged me with their pikes, 
and brought me to a retreat ; but by this time the 
king had sent over 800 men more, and they coming 
up to me the foot retreated. Those on the bridge 
finding how ^t was, and having no supplies sent them, 
as before, fainted, and fled ; and the dragoons rush- 
ing forward most of then^ were killed ; about 160 of 
[824] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the enemy were killed, of which all the officers at the 
bridge, the rest run away. 

The town suffered for it, for our men left them 
little of anything they could carry. Here we halted 
and raised contributions, took money of the country 
and of the open towns, to exempt them from plunder. 
Twice we faced the town of Cambridge, and several 
of our officers advised his Majesty to storm it. But 
having no foot, and but 1200 dragoons, wiser heads 
diverted him from it, and leaving Cambridge on the 
left, we marched to Wobum, in Bedfordshire, and 
our parties raised money all over the county quite 
into Hertfordshire, within five miles of St. Alban's. 

The swiftness of our march, and uncertainty which 
way we intended, prevented all possible preparation 
to oppose us, and we met with no party able to make 
head against us. From Woburn the king went 
through Buckingham to Oxford ; some of our men 
straggling in the villages for plunder, were often 
picked up by the enemy. But in all this long march 
we did not lose 200 men, got an incredible booty, 
and brought six waggons laden with money, besides 
2000 horses and 3000 head of cattle, into Oxford. 
From Oxford his Majesty moves again into Glouces- 
tershire, having left about 1500 of his horse at 
Oxford to scour the country, and raise contributions, 
which they did as far as Reading. 

Sir Thomas Fairfax was returned from taking 
Bridgewater, and was sat down before Bristol, in 
which Prince Rupert commanded with a strong gar- 
rison, 2500 foot and 1000 horse. We had not foi-ce 
enough to attempt anything there. But the Scots, 
[826] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

who lay still before Hereford, were afraid of us, 
having before parted with all their horse under 
Lieutenant-General Leslie, and but ill stored with 
provisions ; and if we came on their backs, were in a 
fair way to be starved, or made to buy their 
provisions at the price of their blood. 

His Majesty was sensible of this, and had we had 
but ten regiments of foot, would certainly have fought 
the Scots. But we had no foot, or so few as was not 
worth while to march them. However, the king 
marched to Worcester, and the Scots, apprehending 
they should be blocked up, immediately raised the 
siege, pretending it was to go help their brethren in 
Scotland, and away they marched northwards. 

We picked up some of their stragglers, but they 
were so poor, had been so ill paid, and so harassed 
at the siege, that they had neither money nor clothes ; 
and the poor soldiers fed upon apples and roots, and 
ate the very green com as it grew in the fields, which 
reduced them to a very sorry condition of health, for 
they died like people infected with the plague. 

' T was now debated whether we should yet march 
for Scotland, but two things prevented — ( 1.) The 
plague was broke out there, and multitudes died of 
it, which made the king backwanl, and the men more 
backward. ( S.) The Marquis of Montrose, having 
routed a whole brigade of Leslie^s best horse, and 
carried all before him, wrote to his Majesty that he 
did not now want assistance, but was in hopes in a 
few days to send a body of foot into England to his 
Majesty^s assistance. This over-confidence of his was 
his ruin ; for, on the contrary, had he earnestly 
[826] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

pressed the king to have marched, and fallen in with 
his horse, the king had done it, and been absolutely 
master of Scotland in a fortnight's time ; but Mont- 
rose was too confident, and defied them all, till at 
last they got their forces together, and Leslie with 
his horse out of England, and worsted him in two or 
three encounters, and then never left him till they 
drove him out of Scotland. 

While his Majesty stayed at Worcester, several 
messengers came to him from Cheshire for relief, 
being exceedingly straitened by the forces of the 
Parliament; in order to which the king marched, 
but Shrewsbury being in the enemy's hands, he 
was obliged to go round by Ludlow, where he was 
joined by some foot out of Wales. I took this 
opportunity to ask his Majesty's leave to go by 
Shrewsbury to my father's, and, taking only two 
servants, I left the army two days before they 
marched. 

This WAS the most unsoldier-like action that ever 
I was guilty of, to go out of the army to pay a 
visit when a time of action was just at hand ; and, 
though I protest I had not the least intimation, no, 
not from my own thoughts, that the army would 
engage, at least before they came to Chester, before 
which I intended to meet them, yet it looked so 
ill, so like an excuse or a sham of cowardice, or 
disaffection to the cause and to my master's interest, 
or something I know not what, that I could not 
bear to think of it, nor never had the heart to see 
the king's face after it. 

From Ludlow the king marched to relieve Ches- 
[ 327 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

ter. PoyntZi who commanded the Parliament's 
forces, follows the king, with design to join with 
the forces before Chester, under Colonel Jones, be- 
fore the king could come up. To that end Poyntz 
passes through Shrewsbury the day that the king 
marched from Ludlow; yet the king's forces got 
the start of him, and forced him to engage. Had 
the kmg engaged him but three hours sooner, and 
consequently further off from Chester, he had ruined 
him, for Poyntz's men, not able to stand the shock 
of the king's horse, gave ground, and would in half- 
an-hour more have been beaten out of the field; 
but Colonel Jones, with a strong party from the 
camp, which was within two miles, comes up in 
the heat of the action, falls on in the king's rear, 
and turned the scale of the day. The body was, 
after an obstinate fight, defeated, and a great many 
gentlemen of quality killed and taken prisoners. 
The Earl of Lichfield was of the number of the 
former, and sixty-seven officers of the latter, with 
1000 others. The king, with about 500 horse, got 
into Chester, and from thence into Wales, whither 
all that could get away made up to him as fast as 
they could, but in a bad condition. 

This was the last stroke they struck ; the rest of 
the war was nothing but taking all his garrisons 
from him one by one, till they finished the war 
with the captivating his person, and then, for 
want of other business, fell to fighting with one 
another. 

I was quite disconsolate at the news of this last 
action, and the more because I was not there. My 
[8S8] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

regiment was wholly dispersed, my lieutenant-col- 
onel, a gentleman of a good family, and a near 
relation to my mother, was prisoner, my major and 
three captains killed, and most of the rest prisoners. 

The king, hopeless of any considerable party in 
Wales, Bristol being surrendered, sends for Prince 
Rupert and Prince Maurice, who came to him. 
With them, and the Lord Digby, Sir Marmaduke 
Langdale, and a great train of gentlemen, his Ma- 
jesty marches to Newark again, leaves 1000 horse 
with Sir William Vaughan to attempt the relief of 
Chester, in doing whereof he was routed the second 
time by Jones and his men, and entirely dispersed. 

The chief strength the king had in these parts 
was at Newark, and the Parliament were very earnest 
with the Scots to march southward and to lay siege 
to Newark ; and while the Parliament pressed them 
to it, and they sat still and delayed it, several heats 
began, and some ill blood between them, which 
afterwards broke out into open war. The English 
reproached the Scots with pretending to help them, 
and really hindering their affairs. The Scots re- 
turned that they came to fight for them, and are 
left to be starved, and can neither get money nor 
clothes. At last they came to this, the Scots will 
come to the siege if the Parliament will send them 
money, but not before. However, as people sooner 
agree in doing ill than in doing well, they came 
to terms, and the Scots came with their whole army 
to the siege of Newark. 

The king, foreseeing the siege, calls his friends 
about him, tells them he sees his circumstances are 
[329] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

such that they can help him but little, nor he pro- 
tect them, and advises them to separate. The Lord 
Digby, with Sir Marmaduke Langdale, with a strong 
body of horse, attempt to get into Scotland to join 
with Montrose, who was still in the Highlands, 
though reduced to a low ebb, but these gentlemen 
are fallen upon on every side and routed, and at 
last, being totally broken and dispersed, they fly to 
the Earl of Derby^s protection in the Isle of Man. 

Prince Rupert, Fnnce Maurice, Colonel Gerard, 
and above 400 gentlemen, all officers of horse, lay 
their commissions down, and seizing upon Wootton 
House for a retreat, make proposals to the Parlia- 
ment to leave the kingdom, upon their parole not to 
return again in arms against the Parliament, which 
was accepted, though afterwards the prince declined 
it. I sent my man post to the prince to be included 
in this treaty, and for leave for all that would accept 
of like conditions, but they had given in the list of 
their names, and could not alter it. 

This was a sad time. The poor remains of the 
king^s fortunes went everywhere to wreck. Every 
garrison of the enemy was full of the Cavalier prison- 
ers, and eveiy garrison the king had was beset with 
enemies, either blocked up or besieged. Goring and 
the Lord Hopton were the only remainders of the 
king^s forces which kept in a body, and Fairfax was 
pushing them with all imaginable vigour with his 
whole army about Exeter and other parts of Devon- 
shire and Cornwall. 

In this condition the king left Newark in the 
night, and got to Oxford. The king had in Oxford 
[880] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

8000 raen, and the towns of Banbury, Fan'ingdon, 
Donnington Castle, and such places as might have 
been brought together in twenty-four hours, 16,000 
or 20,000 men, with which, if he had then resolved 
to have quitted the place, and collected the forces in 
Worcester, Hereford, Lichfield, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, 
and all the small castles and garrisons he had there- 
abouts, he might have had near 40,000 men, might 
have beaten the Scots from Newark, Colonel Jones 
from Chester, and all, before Fairfax, who was in the 
west, could be able to come to their relief. And this 
his Majesty's friends in North Wales had concerted ; 
and, in order to it. Sir Jacob Ashby gathered what 
forces he could, in our parts, and attempted to join 
the king at Oxford, and to have proposed it to him ; 
but Sir Jacob was entirely routed at Stow-on-the- 
Wold, and taken prisoner, and of 3000 men not 
above 600 came to Oxford. 

All the king's garrisons dropped one by one; 
Hereford, which had stood out against the whole 
army of the Scots, was surprised by isix men and a 
lieutenant dressed up for country labourers, and a 
constable pressed to work, who cut the guards in 
pieces, and let in a party of the enemy. Chester 
was reduced by famine, all the attempts the king 
made to relieve it being frustrated. 

Sir Thomas Fairfax routed the Lord Hopton at 
Torrington, and drove him to such extremities, that 
he was forced up into the farthest comer of Corn- 
wall. The Lord Hopton had a gallant body of 
horse with him of nine brigades, but no foot ; Fair- 
fax, a great army. 

[381] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Heartless, and tired out with continual ill news, 
and ill success, I had frequent meetings with some 
gentlemen who had escaped from the rout of Sir 
William Vaughan, and we agreed upon a meeting 
at Worcester, of all the friends we could get, to see if 
we could i*aise a body fit to do any service ; or, if not, 
to consider what was to be done. At this meeting 
we had almost as many opinions as people; our 
strength appeared too weak to make any attempt, 
the game was too far gone in our parts to be re- 
trieved ; all we could make up did not amount to 
above 800 horse. 

^was unanimously . agreed not to go into the 
Parliament as long as our royal master did not give 
up the cause ; but in all places, and by all possible 
methods, to do him all the service we could. Some 
proposed one thing, some another; at last we pro- 
posed getting vessels to carry us to the Isle of Man 
to the Earl of Derby, as Sir Marmaduke Langdale, 
Lord Digby, and others had done. I did not foresee 
any service it would be to the king^s affairs, but I 
started a proposal that, marching to Pembroke in a 
body, we should there seize upon all the vessels we 
could, and embarking ourselves, horses, and what 
foot we could get, cross the Severn Sea, and land in 
Cornwall to the assistance of Prince Charles, who was 
in the army of the Lord Hopton, and where only 
there seemed to be any possibility of a chance for 
the remaining part of our cause. 

This proposal was not without its difficulties, as 
how to get to the seaside^ and, when there, what 
assurance of shipping. The enemy, under Major- 
[332] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

General Langhom, had overrun Wales, and '*t would 
be next to impossible to effect it. 

We could never carry our proposal with the whole 
assembly ; but, however, about 200 of us resolved to 
attempt it, and [the] meeting being broken up with- 
out coming to any conclusion, we had a private meet- 
ing among ourselves to effect it. 

We despatched private messengers to Swansea and 
Pembroke, and other pleu:es ; but they all discoui^ed 
us from the attempt that way, and advised us to go 
higher towards North Wales, where the king's inter- 
est had more friends, and the Parliament no forces. 
Upon this we met, and resolved, and having sent 
several messengers that way, one of my men provided 
us two small vessels in a little creek near Harlech 
Castle, in Merionethshire. We marched away with 
what expedition we could, and embarked in the two 
vessels accordingly. It was the worst voyage sure 
that ever man went ; for first we had no manner of 
accommodation for so many people, hay for our horses 
we got none, or very little, but good store of oats, 
which served us for our own bread as well As proven- 
der for the horses. 

In this condition we put off to sea, and had a fair 
wind all the first night, but early in the morning a 
sudden storm drove us within two or three leagues of 
Ireland. In this pickle, sea-sick, our horses rolling 
about upon one another, and ourselves stifled for want 
of room, no cabins nor beds, very cold weather, and 
very indifferent diet, we wished ourselves ashore again 
a thousand times ; and yet we were not willing to go 
ashore in Ireland if we could help it; for the rebels 
[838] 



Digitized by 



Googk 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

having possession of every place, that was just having 
our throats cut at once. Having rolled about at the 
mercy of the winds all day, the storm ceasing in the 
evening, we had fair weather again, but wind enough, 
which being large, in two days and a night we came 
upon the coast of Cornwall, and, to our no small com- 
fort, landed the next day at St. Ives, in the county 
of ComwalL 

We rested ourselves here, and sent an express to 
the Lord Hopton, who was then in Devonshire, 
of our arrival, and desir^ him to assign us quarters, 
and send us his farther orders. His lordship ex- 
pressed a v^ry great satisfaction at our arrival, and 
left it to our own conduct to join him as we saw 
convenient. 

We were marching to join him, when news came 
that Fairfax had given him an entire defeat at Tor- 
rington. This was but the old story over again. We 
had been used to ill news a great while, and ^t was 
the less surprise to us. 

Upon this news we halted at Bodmin, till we should 
hear farther ; and it was not long before we saw a 
confirmation of the news before our eyes, for the Lord 
Hopton, with the remainder of the horse, which he 
had brought off at Torrington in a very shattered 
condition, retreated to Launceston, the first town in 
Cornwall, and hearing that Fairfax pursued him, 
came on to Bodmin. Hither he summoned all the 
troops which he had left, which, when he had got 
together, were a fine body indeed of 6000 horse, but 
few foot but what were at Pendennis, Barnstaple, 
and other garrisons. These were commanded by 
[884] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the Lord Hopton. The Lord Goring had taken 
shipping for France to get relief a few days before. 

Here a grand council of war was called, and several 
things were proposed, but as it cdways is in distress, 
people are most in*esolute, so ^twas here. Some 
were for breaking through by force, our number be- 
ing superior to the enemy^s horse. To fight them 
with their foot would be desperation and ridiculous ; 
and to retreat would but be to coop up themselves 
in a narrow place, where at last they must be forced 
to fight upon disadvantage, or yield at mercy. 
Others opposed this as a desperate action, and with- 
out probability of success, and all were of different 
opinions. I confess, when I saw how things were, I 
saw 't was a lost game, and I was for the opinion of 
breaking through, and doing it now, while the 
country was open and large, and not being forced to 
it when it must be with more disadvantage. But 
nothing was resolved on, and so we retreated before 
the enemy. Some small skirmishes there happened 
near Bodmin, but none that were very considerable. 

' T was the 1st of March when we quitted Bodmin, 
and quartered at large at Columb, St. Dennis, and 
Truro, and the enemy took his quarters at Bodmin, 
posting his horse at the passes from Fadstow on the 
north, to Wadebridge, Lostwithiel, and Fowey, 
spreading so from sea to sea, that now breaking 
through was impossible. There was no more room 
for counsel ; for unless we had ships to carry us off, 
we had nothing to do but when we were fallen upon, 
to defend ourselves, and sell victory as dear as we 
could to the enemies. 

[885] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

The Prince of Wales seeing the distress we were 
in, and loth to fall into the enemy^s hands, ships 
himself on board some vessels at Falmouth, with 
about 400 lords and gentlemen. And as I had no 
command here to oblige my attendance, I was once 
going to make one, but my comrades, whom I had 
been the principal occasion of bringing hither, began 
to take it ill, that I would leave them, and so I 
resolved we would take our fate together. 

While thus we had nothing before us but a soldier^s 
death, a fair field, and a strong enemy, and people 
began to look one upon another, the soldiers asked 
how their officers looked, and the officers asked how 
their soldiers looked, and every day we expected to 
be our last, when unexpectedly the enemy^s general 
sent a trumpet to Truro to my Lord Hopton, with a 
very handsome gentlemanlike offer : — 

That since the general could not be ignorant of his 
present condition, and that the place he was in could 
not affoixl him subsistence or defence ; and especially 
considering that the state of our affairs were such, 
that if we should escape from thence we could not 
remove to our advantage, he had thought good to 
let us know, that if we would deliver up our horses 
and arms, he would, for avoiding the effusion of 
Christian blood, or the putting any unsoldierly ex« 
tremities upon us, allow such honourable and safe 
conditions, as were rather better than our present 
circumstances could demand, and such as should dis- 
charge him to all the world, as a gentleman, as a 
soldier, and as a Christian. 

After this followed the conditions he would give 
[886] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

us, which were as follows, viz.: — That all the 
soldiery, as well English as foreigners, should have 
liberty to go beyond the seas, or to their own dwell- 
ings, as they pleased; and to such as shall choose 
to live at home, protection for their liberty, and 
from all violence and plundering of soldiers, and to 
give them bag and baggage, and all their goods, ex- 
cept horses and arms. 

That for officers in commissions, and gentlemen 
of quality, he would allow them horses for them- 
selves and one servant, or more, suitable to their 
quality, and such arms as are suitable to gentlemen 
of such quality travelling in times of peace ; and 
such officers as would go beyond sea, should take 
with them their full arms and number of horses as 
are allowed in the army to such officers. 

That all the troopers shall receive on the delivery 
of their horses, 20s. a man to carry them home ; and 
the general's pass and recommendation to any gentle- 
man who desires to go to the Parliament to settle 
the composition for their estates. 

Lastly, a very honourable mention of the general, 
and offer of their mediation to the Parliament, to 
treat him as a man of honour, and one who has 
been tender of the country, and behaved himself 
with all the moderation and candour that could be 
expected from an enemy. 

Upon the unexpected receipt of this message, a 
council of war was called, and the letter read ; no 
man offered to speak a word ; the general moved it, 
but every one was loth to begin. 

At last an old colonel starts up, and asked the 
23 [ 337 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

general what he thought might occasion the writing 
this letter? The general told him, he could not 
tell ; but he could tell, he was sure, of one thing, 
that he knew what was not the occasion of it, viz., 
that is, not any want of force in their army to 
oblige us to other terms. Then a doubt was started, 
whether the king and Parliament were not in any 
treaty, which this agreement might be prejudicial to. 
This occasioned a letter to my Lord Fairfax, wherein 
our genei*al returning the civilities, and neither 
accepting nor refusing his proposal, put it upon his 
honour, whether there was not some agreement or 
concession between his Majesty and the Parliament, 
in order to a general peace, which this treaty might 
be prejudicial to, or thereby be prejudicial to us. 

The Lord Fairfax ingenuously declared, he had 
heard the king had made some concessions, and he 
heartily wished he would make such as would settle 
the kingdom in peace, that Englishmen might not 
wound and destroy one another; but that he de- 
clared he knew of no treaty commenced, nor any-r 
thing passed which could give us the least shadow 
of hope for any advantage in not accepting his con- 
ditions ; at last telling us, that though he did not 
insult over our circumstances, yet if we thought fit, 
upon any such supposition, to refuse his offers, he was 
not to seek in his measures. 

And it appeared so, for he immediately advanced 
his forloms, and dispossessed us of two advanced 
quarters, and thereby straitened us yet more. 

We had now nothing to say, but treat, and our 
general was so sensible of our condition, that he re- 
[888J 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

turned the trumpet with a safe-conduct for commis- 
sioners at twelve oVIock that night ; upon which a 
cessation of arms was agreed on» we quitting Truro 
to the Lord Fairfax, and he left St. Allen to us to 
keep our headquarters. 

The conditions were soon agreed on ; we disbanded 
nine full brigades of horse, and all the conditions 
were observed with the most honour and care by the 
enemy that ever I saw in my life. 

Nor can I omit to make very honourable mention 
of this noble gentleman, though I did not like his 
cause ; but I never saw a man of a more pleasant, 
calm, courteous, downright, honest behaviour in my 
life ; and for his courage and personal bravery in the 
field, that we had felt enough of. No man in the 
world had more iire and fury in him while in action, 
or more temper and softness out of it. In short, and 
I cannot do him greater honour, he exceedingly came 
near the character of my foreign hero, Gustavus 
Adolphus, and in my account is, of all the soldiers 
in Europe, the fittest to be reckoned in the second 
place of honour to him. 

I had particular occasion to see much of his temper 
in all this action, being one of the hostages given by 
our general for the performance of the conditions, in 
which circumstance the general did me several times 
the honour to send to me to dine with him ; and was 
exceedingly pleased to discourse with me about the 
passages of the wars in Germany, which I had served 
in, he having been at the same time in the Low 
Countries in the service of Prince Maurice; but I 
observed if at any time my civilities extended to 
[339] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

commendations of his own actions, and especially to 
comparing him to Gustavus Adolphus, he would 
blush like a woman, and be uneasy, declining the 
discourse, and],in this he was still more like him. 

Let no man sciniple my honourable mention of this 
noble enemy, since no man can suspect me of favour- 
ing the cause he embarked in, which I served as 
heartily against as any man in the army ; but I can- 
not conceal extraordinary merit for its being placed 
in an enemy. 

This was the end of our making war, for now we 
were all under parole never to bear arms against the 
Parliament ; and though some of us did not keep our 
word, yet I think a soldier^s parole ought to be the 
most sacred in such case, that a soldier may be the 
easier trusted at all times upon his word. For my 
part, I went home fully contented, since I could do 
my royal master no better service, that I had come 
off no worse. 

The enemy going now on in a full current of suc- 
cess, and the king reduced to the last extremity, and 
Fairfax, by long marches, being come back within 
five miles of Oxford, his Majesty, loth to be cooped 
up in a town which could on no account hold long 
out, quits the town in a disguise, leaving Sir Thomas 
Glemham governor, and being only attended with 
Mr. Ashbumham and one more, rides away to 
Newark, and there fatally committed himself to the 
honour and fidelity of the Scots under General 
Leven. 

There had been some little bickering between the 
Parliament and the Scots commissioners concerning 
[840] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the propositions which the Scots were for a treaty with 
the king upon, and the Parliament refused it. The 
Parliament, upon all proposals of peace, had formerly 
invited the king to come and throw himself upon the 
honour, fidelity, and affection of his Parliament. 
And now the king from Oxford offering to come up 
to London on the protection of the Parliament for 
the safety of his person, they refused him, and the 
Scots differed from them in it, and were for a per- 
sonal treaty. 

This, in our opinion, was the reason which 
prompted the king to throw himself upon the 
fidelity of the Scots, who really by their infidelity 
had been the ruin of aXL his affairs, and now, by their 
perfidious breach of honour and faith with him, will 
be virtually and mediately the ruin of his person. 

The Scots were, as all the nation beside them was, 
surprised at the king^'s coming among them ; the 
Parliament began very high with them, and send an 
order to General Leven to send the king to Warwick 
Castle ; but he was not so hasty to part with so rich 
a prize. As soon as the king came to the general, 
he signs an order to Colonel Bellasis, the governor 
of Newark, to surrender it, and immediately the 
Scots decamp homewards, carrying the king in the 
camp with them, and marching on, a house was 
ordered to be provided for the king at Newcastle, 

And now the Parliament saw their error, in refus- 
ing his Majesty a personal treaty, which, if they had 
accepted (their army was not yet taught the way of 
huffing their masters), the kingdom might have been 
settled in peace. Upon this the Parliament send to 
[341] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

Greneral Leven to have his Majesty not be sent, which 
was their first language, but be suffered to come to 
London to treat with his Parliament ; before it was, 
"Let the king be sent to Warwick Castle;'* now 
'tis, "To let his Majesty come to London to treat 
with his people.** 

But neither one or the other would do with the 
Scots ; but we who knew the Scots best knew that 
there was one thing would do with them, if the other 
would not, and that was money ; and therefore our 
hearts ached for the king. 

The Scots, as I said, had retreated to Newcastle 
with the king, and there they quartered their whole 
army at large upon the country; the Parliament 
voted they had no farther occasion for the Scots, 
and desired them to go home about their business. 
I do not say it was in these words, but in whatsoever 
good words their messages might be expressed, this 
and nothing less was the English of it. The Scots 
reply, by setting forth their losses, damages, and 
dues, the substance of which was, "Pay us our 
money and we will be gone, or else we won't stir." 
The Parliament call for an account of their de- 
mands, which the Scots give in, amounting to a 
million; but, according to their custom, and espe- 
cially finding that the army under Fairfax inclined 
gradually that way, fall down to ^500,000, and at 
last to £4mfiOO ; but all the while this is transact- 
ing a separate treaty is carried on at London with 
the commissioners of Scotland, and afterwards at 
Edinburgh, by which it is given them to understand 
that, whereas upon payment of the money, the Scots 
[ 842 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

army is to march out of England, and to give up all 
the towns and garrisons which they hold in this 
kingdom, so they are to take it for granted that 't is 
the meaning of the treaty that they shall leave the 
king in the hands of the English Parliament. 

To make this go down the better, the Scotch 
Parliament, upon his Majesty's desire to go with 
their army into Scotland, send him for answer, that 
it cannot be for the safety of his Majesty or of the 
State to come into Scotland, not having taken the 
Covenant, and this was carried in their Parliament 
but by two voices. 

The Scots having refused his coming into Scot- 
land, as was concerted between the two Houses, and 
their array being to march out of England, the 
delivering up the king became a consequence of the 
thing — unavoidable, and of necessity. 

His Majesty, thus deserted of those into whose 
hands he had thrown himself, took his leave of the 
Scots general at Newcastle, telling him only, in few 
words, this sad truth, that he was bought and sold. 
The Parliament commissioners received him at New- 
castle from the Scots, and brought him to Holmby 
House, in Northamptonshire ; from whence, upon 
the quarrels and feuds of parties, he was fetched by 
a party of horse, commanded by one Cornet Joyce, 
from the army, upon their mutinous rendezvous at 
Triplow Heath; and, after this, suffering many 
violences and varieties of circumstances among the 
army, was carried to Hampton Court, from whence 
his Majesty very readily made his escape ; but not 
having notice enough to provide effectual means for 
[343] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

his more effectual deliverance, was obliged to deliver 
himself to Colonel Hammond in the Isle of Wight. 
Here, after some very indifferent usage, the Parlia- 
ment pursued a farther treaty with him, and all 
points were agreed but two: the entire abolishing 
Episcopacy, which the king declared to be against 
his conscience and his coronation oath ; and the sale 
of the Church lands, which he declared, being most 
of them gifts to Grod and the Church, by persons 
deceased, his Majesty thought could not be alienated 
without the highest sacrilege, and if taken from the 
uses to which they were appointed by the wills of 
the donors, ought to be restored back to the heirs 
and fistmilies of the persons who bequeathed them. 

And these two articles so stuck with his Majesty, 
that he ventured his fortune, and royal family, and 
his own life for them. However, at last, the king 
condescended so far in these, that the Parliament 
voted his Majesty^s concessions to be sufficient to 
settle and establish the peace of the nation. 

This vote discovered the bottom of all the counsels 
which then prevailed ; for the army, who knew if 
peace were once settled, they should be undone, 
took the alarm at this, and clubbing together in 
committees and councils, at last brought themselves 
to a degree of hardness above all that ever this nation 
saw; for, calling into question the proceedings of 
their masters who employed them, they immediately 
fall to work upon the Parliament, remove Colonel 
Hammond, who had the charge of the king, and 
used him honourably, place a new guard upon him, 
dismiss the commissioners, and put a stop to the 
[844] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

treaty ; and, following their blow, march to London, 
place regiments of foot at the Pcu^liament-house 
door, and, as the members came up, seize upon all 
those whom they had down in a list as promoters of 
the settlement and treaty, and would not suffer them 
to sit ; but the rest who, being of their own stamp, 
are permitted to go on, carry on the designs of the 
army, revive their votes of non-addresses to the 
king, and then, upon the army's petition to bring 
all delinquents to justice, the mask was thrown off, 
the word all is declared to be meant the king, as 
well as eveiy man else they pleased. T? is too sad a 
story, and too much a matter of grief to me, and tx) 
all good men, to renew the blackness of those days, 
when law and justice was under the feet of power; 
the army iniled the Parliament, the private officers 
their generals, the common soldiers their officers, 
and confusion was in every part of the government. 
In this hurry they sacrificed their king, and shed the 
blood of the English nobility without mercy. 

The history of the times will supply the particulars 
which I omit, being willing to confine myself to my 
own accounts and observations. I was now no more 
an actor, but a melancholy observator of the mis- 
fortunes of the times. I had given my parole not to 
take up arms against the Parliament, and I saw 
nothing to invite me to engage on their side. I 
saw a world of confusion in all their counsels, and I 
always expected that in a chain of distractions, as it 
generally falls out, the last link would be destruc- 
tion ; and though I pretended to no prophecy, yet 
the progress of affairs have brought it to pass, and I 
[345] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

have seen Providence, who suffered, for the correc- 
tion of this nation, the sword to govern and devour 
us, has at last brought destruction by the sword 
upon the head of most of the party who first drew it. 

If together with the brief account of what concern 
I had in the active part of the war, I leave behind 
me some of my own remarks and observations, it 
may be pertinent enough to my design, and not un- 
useful to posterity. 

1. I observed by the sequel of things that it may be 
some excuse to the first Parliament, who began this 
war, to say that they manifested their designs were 
not aimed at the monarchy, nor their quarrel at the 
person of the king ; because, when they had him in 
their power, though against his will, they would 
have restored both his person and dignity as a king, 
only loading it with such clogs of the people^s power 
as they at first pretended to, viz., the militia, and 
power of naming the great officers at couii:, and the 
like; which powers, it was never denied, had been 
stretched too far in the beginning of this king^s 
reign, and several things done illegally, which his 
Majesty had been sensible of, and was willing to 
rectify; but they having obtained the power by vic- 
tory, resolved so to secure themselves, as that, when- 
ever they laid down their arms, the king should not 
be able to do the like again. And thus far they 
were not to be so much blamed, and we did not on 
our own paii; blame them, when they had obtained 
the power, for parting with it on good terms. 

But when I have thus far advocated for the en- 
[846] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

emies, I must be very free to state the crimes of this 
bloody war by the events of it. T is manifest there 
were among them from the beginning a party who 
aimed at the very root of the government, and at 
the very thing which they brought to pass, viz., the 
deposing and murdering of their sovereign ; and, as 
the devil is always master where mischief is the 
work, this party prevailed, turned the other out of 
doors, and overturned all that little honesty that 
might be in the first beginning of this unhappy strife. 
The consequence of this was, the Presbyterians 
saw their error when it was too late, and then would 
gladly have joined the royal party to have suppressed 
this new leaven which had infected the lump ; and 
this is very remarkable, that most of the first cham- 
pions of this war who bore the brunt of it, when the 
king was powerful and prosperous, and when there 
was nothing to be got by it but blows, first or last, 
were so ill used by this independent, powerful party, 
who tripped up the heels of all their honesty, that 
they were either forced by ill treatment to take up 
arms on our side, or suppressed and reduced by them. 
In this the justice of Providence seemed very con- 
spicuous, that these having pushed all things by 
violence against the king, and by arms and force 
brought him to their will, were at once both robbed 
of the end, their Church government, and punished 
for drawing their swords against their masters, 
by their own servants drawing the sword against 
them ; and God, in His due time, punished the others 
too. And what was yet farther strange, the punish- 
ment of this crime of making war against their king, 
[ 847 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

singled out those very men, both in the army and in 
the Parliament, who were the greatest champions of 
the Presbyterian cause in the council and in the field. 
Some minutes, too, of circumstances I cannot forbear 
observing, though they are not very material, as to 
the fatality and revolutions of days and times. 

A Roman Catholic gentleman of Lancashire, a 
very religious man in his way, who had kept a cal- 
culate of times, and had observed mightily the 
fatality of times, places, and actions, being at my 
father^s house, was discoursing once upon the last 
judgment of God in dating His providences, so as 
to signify to us His displeasure at particular cir- 
cumstances ; and, among an infinite number of col- 
lections he had made, these were some which I took 
particular notice of, and from whence I b^an to 
observe the like: — 

1. That King Edward VI. died the very same 
day of the same month in which he caused the 
altar to be taken down, and the image of the Blessed 
Virgin in the Cathedral of St PauPs. 

2. That Cranmer was burnt at Oxford the same 
day and month that he gave King Henry VIIL 
advice to divorce his Queen Catherine. 

3. That Queen Elizabeth died the same day and 
month that she resolved, in her Privy Council, to 
behead the Queen of Scots. 

4. That King James died the same day that he 
published his book against Bellarmine. 

5. That King Charleses long Parliament, which 
ruined him, began the very same day and month 

[848] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

which that Parliament began, that at the request 
of his predecessor robbed the Roman Chuix;h of all 
her revenues, and suppressed abbeys and monasteries. 

How just his calculations were, or how true the 
matter of fact, I cannot tell, but it put me upon 
the same in several actions and successes of this war. 
And I found a great many circumstances, as to 
time or action, which befell both his Majesty and 
his parties first ; 

Then others which befell the Parliament and 
Presbyterian faction, which raised the war ; 

Then the Independent tyranny which succeeded 
and supplanted the first party ; 

Then the Scots, who acted on both sides ; 

Lastly, the restoration and re-establishment of 
the loyalty and religion of our ancestors. 

1. For King Charles I, ; 't is observable, that the 
charge against the Earl of Stmfibrd, a thing which 
his Majesty blamed himself for all the days of his 
life, and at the moment of his last suffering, was 
first read in the Lords^ House on the 30th of Jan- 
uary, the same day of the month six years that the 
king himself was brought to the block. 

2. That the king was carried away prisoner from 
Newark, by the Scots, May 10, the same day six 
years that, against his conscience and promise, he 
passed the bill of attainder against the loyal, noble 
Earl of Strafford. 

3. The same day seven years that the king en- 
tered the House of Commons for the five members, 
which all his friends blamed him for, the same day 

. [ 849 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

the Rump voted bringing his Majesty to trial, after 
they had set by the Lords for not agreeing to it, 
which was the 3rd of January 1648. 

4. The ISth of May 1646, being the surrender of 
Newark, the Parliament held a day of thanksgiving 
and rejoicing, for the reduction of the king and his 
party, and finishing the war, which was the same 
day five years that the Earl of Strafford was 
beheaded. 

5. The battle at Naseby, which ruined the king'^s 
affairs, and where his secretary and his office was 
taken, was the 14th of June, the same day and month 
the first commission was given out by his Majesty to 
raise forces. 

6. The queen voted a traitor by the Parliament 
the 3rd of May, the same day and month she carried 
the jewels into France. 

7. The same day the king defeated Essex in the 
west, his son, King Charles II., was defeated at 
Worcester. 

8. Archbishop Laud'^s house at Lambeth assaulted 
by the mob, the same day of the same month that 
he advised the king to make war upon the Scots. 

9. Impeached the 15th of December 1640, the 
same day twelvemonth that he ordered the Common 
Prayer-Book of Scotland to be printed* in order to be 
imposed upon the Scots, from which all our troubles 
b^an. 

But many more, and more strange, are the critical 
junctures of affairs in the case of the enemy, or at 
least more observed by me : — 
[860] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

1. Sir John Hotham, who repulsed his Majesty 
and refused him admittance into Hull before the war, 
was seized at Hull by the same Parliament for whom 
he had done it, the same 10th day of August two 
years that he drew the first blood in that war. 

% Hampden of Buckinghamshire killed the same 
day one year that the mob petition from Bucks was 
presented to the king about him, as one of the five 
members. 

3. Young Captain Hotham executed the 1st of 
January, the same day that he assisted Sir Thomas 
Fairfax in the first skirmish with the king^s forces at 
Bramham Moor. 

4. The same day and month, being the 6th of 
August 1641, that the Parliament voted to raise an 
army against the king, the same day and month, anno 
1648, the Parliament wei*e assaulted and turned out 
of doors by that very army, and none left to sit but 
who the soldiers pleased, which were therefore called 
tlie Rump. 

6. The Earl of Holland deserted the king, who 
had made him general of the horse, and went over 
to the Parliament, and the 9th of March 1641, canied 
the Commons^ i*eproaching declaration to the king ; 
and afterwards taking up arms for the king against 
the Parliament, was beheaded by them the 9th of 
March 1648, just seven years after. 

6. The Earl of Holland was sent to by the king to 
come to his assistance and i*efused, the 11th of July 
1641, and that very day seven years after was taken 
by the Parliament at St. Neots. 

7. Colonel Massey defended Gloucester against the 

[861] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OP A CAVALIER 

king, and beat him off the 5th of September 1643 ; 
was taken after by Cromwell'^s men fighting for the 
king, on the 5th of September 1651, two or three 
days after the fight at Worcester. 

8. Richard Cromwell resigning, because he could 
not help it, the Parliament voted a free Common- 
wealth, without a single person or House of Lords. 
This was the 25th of May 1668; the 25th of May 
1660, the king landed at Dover, and restored the 
government of a single person and House of Lords. 

9. Lambert was proclaimed a traitor by the Par- 
liament April the 20th, being the same day he 
proposed to Oliver Cromwell to take upon him the 
title of king. 

10. Monk being taken prisoner at Nantwich by Sir 
Thomas Fairfax, revolted to the Parliament the same 
day nineteen years he declared for the king, and 
thereby restored the royal authority. 

11. The Pailiament voted to approve of Sir John 
Hotham^s repulsing the king at Hull, the 28th of 
April 1642 ; the 28th of April 1660, the Parliament 
first debated in the House the restoring the king to 
the crown. 

12. The agitators of the army formed themselves 
into a cabal, and held their first meeting to seize on 
the king^s person, and take him into their custody 
from Holmby, the 28th of April 1647 ; the same 
day, 1660, the Parliament voted the agitators to be 
taken into custody, and committed as many of them 
as could be found. 

13. The Parliament voted the queen a traitor for 
assisting her husband, the king. May the Srd, 1643 ; 

[852] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

her son, King Charles II., was presented with the 
votes of Parliament to restore him, and the present 
of 0^60,000, the 3rd of May 1660. 

14. The same day the Parliament passed the Act 
for recognition of Oliver Cromwell, October 13th, 
1654, Lambert broke up the Parliament and set up 
the army, 1669, October the 18th. 

Some other observations I have made, which, as not 
so pertinent, I forbear to publish, among which I have 
noted the fatality of some days to parties, as — 

The 2nd of September : The fight at Dunbar ; the 
fight at Worcester ; the oath against a single person 
passed; Oliver's first Parliament called. For the 
enemy. 

The 2nd of September : Essex defeated in Corn- 
wall ; Oliver died ; city works demolished. For the 
king. 

The 29th of May : Prince Charles bom ; Leicester 
taken by storm ; King Charles II. restored. Ditto. 

Fatality of circumstances in this unhappy war, as — 

1. The English Parliament calls in the Scots, to 
invade their king, and are invaded themselves by the 
same Scots, in defence of the king whose case, and the 
design of the Parliament, the Scots had mistaken. 

2. The Scots, who unjustly assisted the Parliament 
to conquer their lawful sovereign, contrary to their 
oath of allegiance, and without any pretence on the 
king's part, are afterwards absolutely conquered and 
subdued by the same Parliament they assisted. 

3. The Parliament, who raised an army to depose 
23 [ 363 ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

their king, deposed by the very army they had 
raised. 

4. The army broke three Parliaments, and are at 
last broke by a free Parliament ; and all they had done 
by the military power, undone at once by the civiL 

5. Abundance of the chief men, who by their fieiy 
spirits involved the nation in a civil war, and took up 
arms against their prince, first or last met with ruin 
or disgrace from their own party. 

(1.) Sir John Hotham and his son, who struck the 
first stroke, both beheaded or hanged by the Parlia- 
ment. 

(S.) Major-General Massey three times taken 
prisoner by them, and once wounded at Worcester, 

(S.) Major-General Langhom, (4.) Colonel Poyer, 
and (5.) Colonel Powell^ changed sides, and at last 
taken, could obtain no other favour than to draw 
lots for their lives ; Colonel Poyer drew the dead lot, 
and was shot to death* 

(6.) Earl of Holland ; who, when the House voted 
who should be reprieved, Lord Goring, who had been 
their worst enemy, or the Earl of Holland, who, ex- 
cepting one offence, had been their constant servant, 
voted Goring to be spared, the Earl to die. 

(7.) The Earl of Essex, their first general ; 

(8.) Sir William Waller; 

(9.) Lieutenant-General Ludlow ; 

(10.) The Earl of Manchester ; 
— all disgusted and voted out of the army, though 
they had stood the first shock of the war, to make 
way for the new model of the army, and introduce a 
party. 

[864] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

In all these confusions I have observed two great 
errors, one of the king, and one of his friends. 

Of the king, that when he was in their custody, 
and at their mercy, he did not comply with the 
propositions of peace, before their army, for want of 
employment, fell into heats and mutinies; that he 
did not at first grant the Scots their own conditions, 
which, if he had done, he had gone into Scotland ; 
and then, if the English would have fought the Scots 
for him, he had a reserve of his loyal friends, who 
would have had room to have fallen in with the 
Scots to his assistance, who were after dispersed and 
destroyed in small parties attempting to serve him. 

While his Majesty remained at Newcastle, the 
queen wrote to him, persuading him to make peace 
upon any terms ; and in politics her Majesty'^s advice 
was certainly the best. For, however low he was 
brought by a peace, it must have been better than 
the condition he was then in. 

The eiTor I mention of the king'^s friends was this, 
that after they saw all was lost, they could not be 
content to sit still, and reserve themselves for better 
fortunes, and wait the happy time when the divisions 
of the enemy would bring them to certain ruin ; but 
must hasten their own miseries by frequent fruitless 
risings, in the face of a victorious enemy, in small 
parties ; and I always found these effects from it : — 

1. The enemy, who were always together by the ears, 
when they were let alone, were united and reconciled 
when we gave them any intenniption ; as particularly, 
in the case of the first assault the army made upon 
them, when Colonel Pride, with his regiment, gar- 
[866] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

bled the House, as they called it. At that time a 
fair opportunity offered ; but it was omitted till it 
was too late. That insult upon the House had 
been attempted the year before, but was hindered 
by the little insurrections of the royal party, and 
the sooner they had fallen out, the better. 

2. These risings being desperate, with vast dis- 
advantages, and always suppressed, ruined all our 
friends ; the remnants of the Cavaliers were lessened, 
the stoutest and most daring were cut off, and the 
king^s interest exceedingly weakened, there not being 
less than 30,000 of his best friends cut off in the 
several attempts made at Maidstone, Colchester, 
Lancashire, Pembroke, Fontefract, Kingston, Preston, 
Warrington, Worcester, and other places. Had 
these men all reserved their fortunes to a conjunction 
with the Scots, at either of the invasions they made 
into this kingdom, and acted with the conduct and 
courage they were known masters of, perhaps neither 
of those Scots armies had been defeated. 

But the impatience of our friends ruined all ; for 
my part, I had as good a mind to put my hand to 
the ruin of the enemy as any of them, but I never 
saw any tolerable appearance of a force able to match 
the enemy, and I had no mind to be beaten and then 
hanged. Had we let them alone, they would have 
fallen into so many parties and factions, and so 
effectually have torn one another to pieces, that 
whichsoever party had come to us, we should, with 
them, have been too hard for all the rest. 

This was plain by the course of things afterwards ; 
when the Independent army had ruffled the Pres- 
[866] 



Digitized by 



Google 



MEMOIRS OF A CAVALIER 

byterian Parliament, the soldiery of that party made 
no sci*uple to join us, and would have restored the 
king with all their hearts, and many of them did 
join us at last. 

And the consequence, though late, ended so; for 
they fell out so many times, army and Parliament, 
Parliament and army, and alternately pulled one 
another down so often, till at last the Presbyterians 
who began the war, ended it, and, to be rid of their 
enemies, rather than for any love to the monarchy, 
restored King Charles the Second, and brought him 
in on the very day that they themselves had formerly 
resolved the ruin of his father^s government, being 
the 29th of May, the same day twenty years that the 
private cabal in London concluded their secret league 
with the Scots, to embroil his father King Charles 
the First 



THE END 






i 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



This book is a preservation photocopy. 

It was produced on Hammermill Laser Print natural white, 

a 60# book weight add-fiee archival paper 

which meets the requirements of 

ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992 (permanence of paper) 

Preservation photocopying and binding 

by 

Acme BooId&gt;inding 

Oiarlestown, Massachusetts 

a 

1997 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



iisafi 

3 9015 03903 8685 




Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



