
ilPP HilMiiHliiilpiifHHiiiip 

■iir ||ii!li!: 

iiJhiimi!;; ,.,..,.,,.,.;n;i!&gt;i ;!■•;■ 



iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii^ 






11 
"I'll' 



;lilti! iiliii 

ijljiiiiiib! 



iiliilliiliiliilllii! 



liiiliiijiiiiiiiiriiili 

■-\\r. 



m 

!ii 



Illilli-i 






m 



1 



iUjjljj.llllllt. 



Illlll 

i! 



m 



illiis 



ii'li! 



ii 



.illiiliiii!!! 



i)ii&gt;ti&gt;;(ii&gt;&gt;iMi&gt;i 



&gt;3r^W'':i^'^'^y^yi^JW^W'&lt;^''t^Vm!W'^jy^M^JW 







^ 






THE WORLD'S 
GREAT CLASSICS 



in 




Timothy Dwight D.D. LLD 
JvsTiN McCarthy 
Richard HenryStoddard 
Pavlvan Dyke, D.D. 
Albert Elleby Bekgh 



q 




ILLVvSTFLATED WITH NVMEFLOVS ^ 
PHOTOGFLAVVB^ES. ETCHINGS /^ 
COLORED PLATES Lr FVLL PACE Ufic 
PORTRAITS OF GREAT AVTHOFLS s5?. 



JVLIAN HaWTHOKNE 
LITER^KY EDITCFL. 

Clakence Cook 

AR.T EDITOBw. 



^ 



THE COLONIAL PRE5S 

• NEW-YORK- --4*- -LONDON 



\\k 



i-J^Lj-ilUi-'J^ 



BARON DE MONTESQUIEU, 

[Charles Dc Secondat.) 

Photogravure from a wood engraving. 



i;])iMim}Li'^«&lt;'y^'&lt;'^^&lt;'^'(^'^'X('yxi.&gt;rx\'))(\^nx&gt;yx(mMi^^^^^ 



yvvr^rr»^^»lnrI »r■r»^TTln^onnnnrrr^ lr».r&gt;■rlr.lrlr.1^■^^^-,^^BJ p^^^^y^^^&gt;»^»^^^^rJlf»^»^^^»^ ^ 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 




]^?^;^ ^i^ WW YM^^ 



'^ 



BARON DE MONTESQUIEU 

(CHARLES DE SECONDAT) 

INCLUDING D'ALEMBERT'S ANALYSIS OF THE WORK 

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH BY 
THOMAS NUGENT, LL.D. 

WITH A SPECIAL INTRODUCTION BY 

HON. FREDERIC R. COUDERT, J.U.D., LL.D. 



r^c 



orn'mmm'TTTTn 



&gt;($r);rv)" 



§^ 




REVISED EDITION 



^•Fffl^S) or* n c c . fe NEW-YORK-^ ] 



Copyright, 1900, 
By the colonial PRESS. 



SRLF 

ml 



SPECIAL INTRODUCTION 

MONTESQUIEU, Charles Louis Secondat de la Brede. 
was born at the Chateau de la Brede, near Bordeaux, 
in the month of January, 1689, He lived sixty-six 
years, and died on the tenth day of February, 1755. If we 
should omit his literary performances from the record of his 
life, and consider his existence apart from his books, the record 
would end here, and it might be said of him, as has been justly 
said of some royal personages, that he was born, he lived and 
he died. Not only was that life uneventful, but it was studi- 
ously shut off from the public eye. He shrank from those who 
would peer into his privacy, and reserved that part of himself 
for his family and his friends. He loved fame, that is, the hon- 
orable repute that grew out of the intellectual productions with 
which he enriched the world. Apart from these, as Horace, 
whom he resembled in many ways, has said of himself: " He 
sought the secret way and unfrequented path of life that steals 
away unknown." 

That he was thoroughly a gentleman in the best sense of the 
word — courteous, gentle, kindly and unassuming — all who 
knew him testify: withal a genuine Gascon in the sparkle of 
his speech, in the southern brogue that he patriotically exag- 
gerated, in his wit and effervescence, in all the qualities that 
he derived from the sunny atmosphere of his native Gascony 
and the ruddy wines that flowed so freely from the land that 
he dearly loved to the end. 

Writers with an ingenious turn for the discovery of analo- 
gies have compared him to Voltaire, who was born but a few 
years after Montesquieu, and survived him many years. Vol- 
taire was undoubtedly a man of rare genius and unequalled skill 
when it came to the work of destruction. To demolish ancient 
things was the task in which he excelled and which he de- 
lighted to perform. His bitterness against the social system of 

iii 



iv MONTESQUIEU 

which the Church was an integral part displayed itself with all 
the venom of personal enmity : it was flavored with the passion 
of revenge rather than a desire to promote right and to pre- 
vent wrong. Throughout all his aggressive life, this feature 
was apparent; it existed in fact and showed itself by unmis- 
takable symptoms. Nor was it without reason. In his early 
youth, he had been subjected to personal indignities at the 
hands of blue-blooded men who considered it the privilege of 
their caste to disregard the claims of those whose pedigree was 
not as long as their own ; they laughed to scorn the demands 
for satisfaction of such, however grievously and wantonly they 
had been injured. When Voltaire sought to obtain redress for 
deliberate affronts, they were repeated in most brutal and 
offensive form; the only compensation that he received was 
free quarters at the Bastille and abundant opportunity, in the 
silence of solitary meditation, to nurse his hatred and to lick his 
wounds. The friend of Frederick II never forgot the humilia- 
tion of his early life : and the sharpness of his pen and tongue 
may both be traced in a measure to these days of wrong un- 
avenged and unpunished. The Church was the ally and prop 
of the social scheme which permitted these wrongs, hence the 
Church must pay the penalty. His rage increased with his 
years, until he boasted, in the heat of his madness, that one 
man might destroy the religion which twelve men had founded. 
But Montesquieu had no personal reasons for disliking 
either Church or State. No insult had embittered his early life, 
his unwounded pride never festered at the recollection of per- 
sonal maltreatment. He was always decorous, conservative 
and prudent. In the rich soil of his generous nature, no seed 
had been sown from which hatred could grow. He was a lover 
of the human race, and sought to promote its happiness. If, 
m the effervescence of his early youth, he allowed his brilliant 
pen to enter upon dangerous fields of controversy, he never 
intended other than good results. He meant to cure, not to 
kill : he hoped to make, not to mar : he sought to repair and to 
improve, not to tear down and to destroy. His warm Gascon 
nature exulted in the mere fact of existence, the sunshine of 
the merry Gascon country was in itself a delight. He would 
have had the whole world as happy as himself. He loved the 
companionship of friends, he delighted in the society of books. 



SPECIAL INTRODUCTION V 

He had never known one single sorrow in his life to resist the 
soothing influence of these silent and eloquent companions. 
They were part of his life ; indeed, the best part, the only part 
by or through which we know him, the only part through 
which he survives. 

Montesquieu became famous in a day. His " Persian Let- 
ters," written when he was thirty years of age, charmed, de- 
lighted and irritated his countrymen, and especially his coun- 
trywomen, who were quite as ready and able as the male part 
of the population to make a writer's fame. The Persian visi- 
tors whom he invented and whose comments upon the society 
and the religion of France he gives to the public, were very free 
in their criticisms of what they saw, and it is not to be wondered 
at that the guardians of public morals looked with suspicion 
and alarm upon the trenchant wit of the Gascon sage, who 
dared to criticise abuses and to laugh at practices which Time 
had rendered venerable. There was, indeed, much that might 
create grave concern in the minds of those who studied the 
Letters of the Persian travellers. We must not forget that the 
roots and branches of State and Church were closely inter- 
woven and intertwined. The blow aimed at the one was in 
effect a blow at the other. Time showed — and Voltaire lived to 
see the day — when the destruction of the existing State must 
needs bring with it a shock and disturbance to the Church. The 
result of the Letters was that the contagion spread which 
the conservatism of Montesquieu would fain have arrested and 
cured. He did not delay the current nor stem the rising tide. 
Perhaps by calling attention to abuses, he aided in producing 
the calamity that he would have deprecated. He gave aid and 
comfort to the enemies of the social system that he would have 
willingly saved: finally, by making these attacks plausible, 
half a century after he was at rest, everything gave way that 
he would have preserved, and the foundations of the world 
were shaken. 

Even when the Letters were at the full tide of success many 
readers who were attached to the existing system of society 
looked with disfavor on their cold disregard of respectable 
barnacles. D'Argenson said : " These are reflections which a 
brilliant man can easily make, but which a prudent man ought 
never to print." Marivaux expressed the class sentiment with 



vi MONTESQUIEU 

accuracy when he said that a man should be sparing of his wit 
on such subjects. Montesquieu himself realized that he had 
become an object of suspicion to the " official classes " who 
sought every occasion to slight him, while they admired his abil- 
ity — of which they thought he had too much. Indeed, it was 
darkly suggested that he was an infidel and possibly might be a 
traitor! These comments had their effect, so far as to induce 
him to disclaim the paternity of a work which it might not be 
quite safe to recognize as his offspring. 

The sale of the " Persian Letters " was all that their author 
could wish. His Jesuit secretary, Pere Desmolets, had confi- 
dently predicted the result : " The Letters will sell like bread," 
he had prophesied. And so they did. They expressed, in 
delightful speech, the thoughts of many who were neither 
able nor daring enough in fitting phrase to attack the powers 
of the day. As for himself, his reputation was, from that 
moment, established as a wit. He was an homme d'esprit. 
Perhaps he was surprised at the success that he had achieved, 
possibly a little alarmed at the construction that had been put 
upon the criticism of his Persians. He had never desired to 
be looked upon as an iconoclast. As he afterwards says, " I am 
not a theologian, I am a historian." If he used the knife, it 
was rather as a kindly surgeon than as a wilful shedder of 
blood. He took no delight in angry controversy. " Men for- 
get," he said, " that when I represent a Turk, I must make him 
talk and act and write like a Turk." The trouble is that his 
Turks talk too much like Parisians and not enough like genuine 
Turks. Their real nationality is but ill disguised by their flow- 
ing robes, and the laughing face of the Bordeaux wine grower 
is seen through their foreign mask. 

The " Causes of the Greatness and Decline of the Romans," 
next issued from Montesquieu's pen, would have assured his 
fame had the " Spirit of Laws " not belittled it by its own supe- 
riority. His Treatise on the Romans is marked by the same per- 
severance and research as his book on the Laws. He delves at 
the roots of History to learn how from general causes events 
have grown. He is no believer in chance : there is a Philoso- 
phy of History with its rules and principles and they must be 
studied and found before we can know the nature and reason 
of Things. " It is not chance that rules the world," he says ; 



SPECIAL INTRODUCTION vii 

" witness the Romans, who had a constant succession of tri- 
umphs while they managed their Government on a certain plan, 
and an uninterrupted series of reverses when it was conducted 
on another. There are general causes, either moral or physical, 
at work in every monarchy, exalting, maintaining or overcom- 
ing it." Upon this theory, he has examined symptoms to as- 
certain causes, and has, with a beauty of style that well became 
the dignity of his subject, first taught men that the records of 
the past might be found to contain sermons as well as tradi- 
tions, lessons as well as facts, and materials for prophecy 
mingled with the dust of ages. 

When the " Spirit of Laws " appeared, the work upon which 
his title to the admiration of posterity must depend, he was 
well known to the literary world as the author of the " Persian 
Letters," but it is not clear that he was much helped by the 
celebrity thus acquired. If there is one reproach in the arsenal 
of Gallic denunciation from which a man seldom recovers who 
aspires to instruct his people, it is the suggestion that he is not 
a serious man {im honiine scrieux), and many thought, no 
doubt, that the putative father of these disrespectful Persians 
was too witty to be serious. How could he write a grave and 
instructive book and at the same time masquerade in Persian 
silks to the tune of Parisian music ! The Professor's gravity did 
not sufficiently appear to entitle the aspiring pedagogue to a 
diploma. 

Although the success of the " Spirit of Laws " was not im- 
mediate in France, it was not long in doubt. In England, intel- 
ligent opinion immediately seized upon the w^ork, and re- 
ceived it with enthusiasm. This was due in a great measure 
to the fact that the author had been a close student and ad- 
mirer of the British Constitution, and had adopted the shortest 
road to the British heart by his intelligent tribute to the superi- 
ority of that vague, shadowy and unwritten Charter of British 
liberty. 

The practical genius of the English mind was happily shown 
on this occasion. The trans-Channel admirers of Montesquieu 
must needs know something about this meridional wise man, 
who had studied, assimilated and understood and expounded 
the Constitution of England as intelligently and satisfactorily 
as though he had opened his eyes to the light at London or 



viii MONTESQUIEU 

Liverpool. Inquiry into his residence and occupation naturally 
developed the fact that the expouncler was not only a book- 
writer but a wine-grower, whereupon British logic suggested 
that the man who wrote so excellent a book must also grow ex- 
cellent wine. The orders for the wine grown at La Brede 
flowed in as rapidly as the orders for copies of the " Spirit of 
Laws," so that Montesquieu's frugal mind rejoiced at this 
double success, which delighted his pride and filled his purse. 
" The success of my book in that country," he said, " con- 
tributed to the success of my wine : but I think that the success 
of my wine has done still more for the success of my book." 
Whether this estimate was based on an overestimate of the 
bouquet of the wine or an underestimate of the greatness of 
the book, we have no means of ascertaining. The fame of the 
La Brede bcand rests wholly on tradition. 

It may not be without interest here to note that Montesquieu, 
though frugal and modest in his personal expenditures, was 
at heart generous and kind. He was a ready giver, but he 
concealed his charities as though they were grievous sins. Os- 
tentation was abhorrent to his nature. His simplicity of life 
was such as to suggest avarice when it was only indifference 
to display. He was quite conscious that he did not live and 
dress and shine like the gaudy members of his own circle and 
felt that love of money for its own sake would be charged 
against him. But he repudiated the reproach. " I have never 
made any display in the way of expense," he said, " but I have 
never been avaricious. I know of no task, however easy of 
performance, that I would have performed to earn money. I 
have, I think, increased my store, but it was rather because I 
flattered myself that I thereby showed a certain kind of ability 
than from any desire to become rich." He could not remember 
to have spent four louis for show, but many a gold piece quietly 
left his purse to relieve a needy applicant. 

One instance may be cited : An English watchmaker once 
wrote him : " I think of hanging myself : but I believe that I 
would not do it if I had one hundred crowns." To which 
Montesquieu immediately replied : " I send you one hundred 
crowns : do not hang yourself, my dear Sully, but come to see 
me." How many English clockmakers he thus saved from 
voluntary strangulation we do not know : he was the last man 



SPECIAL INTRODUCTION ix 

to record the number of those or of others whom he rescued 
from despair. 

That Montesquieu did think highly of his masterpiece, we 
know from his own expressions. He exulted with a school- 
boy's delight at the completion of his task, and as his weary pen 
traced the last words of his immortal work, his memory re- 
called the tempest-tossed companions of Aeneas as they 
touched the shores of the promised land. " Italiam, Italiani," 
he exclaimed. The joy of triumph and the hope of repose com- 
bined to make this the happiest moment of his life. The long 
labor of twenty years was ended and the prize of endless fame 
secured. Like the Augustan Poet, he felt sure that he would 
not wholly die, for he had erected a monument more enduring 
than brass. But the labor and anxiety were almost more than 
he could bear. As he revised his last proofs, he said : " This 
work has well-nigh killed me : I am going to rest : I shall labor 
no more." He lived eight years longer, but made no effort to 
add to his fame or to his claims upon the world. 

It is curious to note how Montesquieu was at first alone of 
his immediate circle to realize and adequately measure the value 
of the " Spirit of Laws." Whether the long and faithful labor 
of years had satisfied him that he could not have thus striven in 
vain or the equipoise of his trained mind allowed him to judge 
as correctly as though he were passing on the performance of 
a stranger, he knew from the outset that the book would win 
him renown. He called his intimates and asked for their opin- 
ion. The critic who showed the most favor kindly declared that 
there was enough in the work to make it valuable as a note- 
book, from which material might be drawn for another Trea- 
tise: the sternest and possibly the most candid of the critics 
bluntly declared that the best plan would be to throw the manu- 
script into the fire as the safest method of guarding the au- 
thor's reputation from the injury which it would receive from 
publication. But he trusted to his own judgment rather than 
to theirs. Undismayed and undisturbed by his comforters, he 
quietly sent his work to the printer, and awaited the result with- 
out anxiety. 

If the " Spirit of Laws " escaped the blazing logs of the 
chateau, thanks to the self-confidence of the author, another 
work of his was less fortunate. He had written a " History of 



X MONTESQUIEU 

Louis XI," one of the most extraordinary and complex char- 
acters in the records of the French Monarchy. Mr. Watson, 
in his " Story of France," says of Louis XI that he was " a 
great King, a thoroughly bad man, and utterly unscrupulous in 
method, yet his life work was upon the whole a benefit to man- 
kind. He was crafty, deceitful, cruel and calculating," Per- 
haps a man may be a great King even if his character is made 
up of such ingredients. But as he did exhibit them in his life, 
it is not to be wondered at if historians, with one accord — still 
according to Mr. Watson — " decry him as a beast unclean." 
The estimate of a French historian of modern times probably 
comes nearer the truth. He says that Louis XI was not a great 
King nor a good King, but still a King ! Our curiosity to know 
what so competent a judge as Montesquieu would have held 
upon this point will never be gratified. The carelessness of the 
secretary, who threw into the flames the complete and price- 
less manuscript, has inflicted a permanent injury upon man- 
kind. Our regret is only heightened by the few samples that 
we have of the work that the world has lost. Who but Mon- 
tesquieu could have described Richelieu in fewer words and 
have given a more accurate photograph of this towering figure 
of French History ! " Richelieu made his King play the second 
part in the Monarchy and the first in Europe : he degraded the 
Sovereign but he ennobled the Throne." 

The necessary limits of this paper will not permit even a brief 
attempt at analyzing the " Spirit of Laws." D'Alembert has 
made the effort, and has written many and dreary pages to 
show what Montesquieu intended to accomplish. But no au- 
thor is more difficult to condense than Montesquieu. He is a 
dealer in epigrams and possessed the talent to a rare degree of 
squeezing the sap out of an idea and of crystallizing it into 
apt and pungent words. So marked is this faculty in him that 
one of his contemporaries, Buffon, who did not err in the same 
direction, accounted for this conciseness by saying that it was 
due to the author's defective vision. His eyes had failed many 
years before his death, and he was obliged to dictate to his 
daughter, who performed for him the same pious office that 
Milton's children performed for their father. As his memory 
was bad, says Buffon, he was obliged to formulate in his own 
mind brief sentences that he was able to carry while the dictation 



SPECIAL INTRODUCTION xi 

was made, and in this way he became accustomed to the form 
of expression which is predominant in his work. Buffon may 
be right, though this compensation to short-sighted men is 
not usually given. If it were, the " Spirit of Laws " would 
not stand out as a shining example of a style that has never, in 
epigrammatic excellence at least, been surpassed. 

The foundation of the work was the attempt to find those 
common principles and emotions which, operating upon men 
of every climate and degree of civilization, produce certain re- 
sults. He was satisfied that those principles existed, and if 
found, would afford a scientific explanation of what without 
their aid would seem to be chaotic and inexplicable. Or, to 
come nearer to his own language, he rejoiced to find in 
" the nature of things " the explanation of so many different 
laws and customs. He was often discouraged and dismayed 
at what he termed " the majesty of his subject." Time and 
again, he flung away the unfinished page, and turned his back 
in despair upon his herculean task. But his courage and the 
philosophy of his temperament never yielded long to debil- 
itating influences. He resumed his labors and continued them 
until he was able to say, like Correggio : " I, too, am a painter " ! 

Montesquieu has been spoken of, and was no doubt con- 
sidered in his day by many, a reformer. And yet the reform- 
ing spirit in him was so mild as to be almost innocuous. He 
did condemn the Inquisition — but who did not even then shrink 
in horror from that awful and mysterious tribunal ? He advo- 
cated the abolition of torture — who would restore it to-day? 
He was supposed to be a champion of religious toleration, but 
went no further in his anxiety to give the benefits of generous 
forbearance to dissenters than the restoration of the Edict of 
Nantes. Yet that Edict gave no equality, only faint-hearted 
toleration, to the men who believed in the same religious doc- 
trines once held by the King who formulated the Edict (assum- 
ing that Henry IV ever entertained any fixed belief on reli- 
gion). Montesquieu was not an advocate of what to-day we 
consider the elementary rights of conscience. He was willing 
that the Huguenots should be permitted, with definite restric- 
tions, to practise their own religious rites, but he was not in 
favor of admitting new beliefs to disturb the State and compli- 
cate the machinery of political society. In other words, if he 



xii MONTESQUIEU 

was in advance of his day in these matters, his conservatism so 
dominated his theories of reform that before the eighteenth 
century had ended, he had long been outstripped in the race 
for toleration by the majority of his people. 

The peculiarities of his style have been criticised, and affecta- 
tion imputed with scant justice. His methods were certainly 
unusual : his brusque transitions, the sudden breaks in the 
continuity of an argument, the dramatic outburst taking the 
place of a formal conclusion, astonish the modern reader by 
their unaccustomed and unexpected appearance. But they 
fulfilled their object, for they captivated the attention as they 
stimulated the curiosity of the reader. He sought to be read 
not only by the scholars and purists of the day, but by the many 
brilliant, if frivolous, people who dabbled in letters and only 
dreaded one thing in a book, to wit, being bored. The deadly 
sin of a writer was to fail in making the attention of the reader 
a prisoner, willing or unwilling. The solid gold of learning 
and wisdom was not enough : the artist's skill must call atten- 
tion to the value of the metal so that the taste might be 
charmed while the mind was satisfied. There must be for the 
reader of the day frequent halting places where he might 
stop and get his breath. He was not always able to keep his 
mind stretched on the rack of continuous attention: he must 
be allowed at times to turn a corner abruptly and catch a new 
view of men or things. 

A few, among the countless instances of Montesquieu's skill 
in cheating the sluggard and decoying the unwary, will illus- 
trate the novelty, the charm and the efifect produced by this 
accomplished artist. Who would not prefer an aphorism to a 
sermon, if the former conveyed all the instruction of the latter? 
As he himself has said : " It is not enough to make one read, 
he must be made to think." His chapter on the " Idea of 
Despotism " contains exactly three lines : Here it is : 



CHAPTER XIII. (Book V.) 

Idea of Despotism. 

When the savages of Louisiana want fruit, they cut the tree 
at the root and pluck the fruit. This is despotic government. 



SPECIAL INTRODUCTION xiii 

His chapter on Torture, of which he was a constant and 
earnest adversary, closes thus : " So many illustrious writers 
have denounced this practice that I dare not speak after them. 
I was going to say that it might be adapted to despotic govern- 
ments, where everything that produces fear enters into the 
government policy : I was going to say that the slaves in Greece 
and Rome. . . . But I hear the voice of nature crying out 
against me ! " 

His definition of Taxation has become classical, perhaps com- 
monplace : " Each citizen contributes to the revenues of the 
State a portion of his property in order that his tenure of the 
resj may be secure." 

His objection to severe punishment for trivial offences : " If 
we examine the cause of all defiance of the law, we shall see 
that it is to be found in the failure to punish crime, not in the 
mederation of the penalty." 

He explains the unpopularity of the English by saying that 
their arrogance is such that even in peace " they seem to negoti- 
ate with none but enemies." But of course, this was much 
more than one century ago. 

The proper limit of Conquest : " There is a natural limit to 
conquest, namely, the poivcr of assimilation." 

Of Liberty, he says : " Liberty consists in the ability to do 
what one ought to desire and in not being forced to do what 
one ought not to desire." 

Of Poverty : " A man is not poor because he has nothing, 
but because he does not work." 

To multiply extracts would swell a modest preface into a 
volume : the temptation to pursue so easy a task must be re- 
sisted. 

The close of his life was marked by the same kindly and 
gentle philosophy that he had exhibited from the beginning. 
He appears to have been a devout and consistent Christian, al- 
though making but few professions and preferring to lock 
up in his own heart the sentiments that he entertained on the 
most important problems that can occupy the mind of man. 
He was not only a believer in, but a great admirer of, the moral- 
ity of the Gospel. He declared that he could not share the 
humility of the atheists, but preferred to believe that his soul 
was immortal and that he himself was not perishable like the 



xiv MONTESQUIEU 

beasts of the field. When Death was imminent, he looked it in 
the face without bravado and without fear. He performed the 
reHgious duties required by his Church with decorous solem- 
nity. His spiritual adviser said, as the end was approaching: 
" No man, better than you. Sir, can realize the greatness of 
God." " No one," he replied, " knows better the littleness of 



man." 



Much and lavish praise waited upon the " Spirit of Laws," 
but the tribute paid by Voltaire during Montesquieu's own life- 
time is the one which best expresses in fewest words the opin- 
ion of his admirers. It is all the more precious because Vol- 
taire never loved him and he himself was never reckoned among 
Voltaire's friends. " The human family had lost its title deeds 
— Montesquieu found them and restored them to their owner." 



)^A 




THE ANALYSIS OF "THE SPIRIT OF LAWS" 

BY JEAN LE ROND D'ALEMBERT 

THE generality of literary men who have mentioned " The 
Spirit of Laws," having rather endeavored to criticise 
it than to give a just idea of it, we shall endeavor to 
supply what they ought to have done, and to explain its plan, 
its nature, and its objects. Those who may think this Analysis 
too long will, perhaps, be of opinion, after having read it, that 
there was no other way of making the author's method properly 
understood. It ought also to be remembered that the history 
of celebrated writers is little more than that of their thoughts 
and their works, and that this part of their history is the most 
essential and most useful. 

Book I. — Men in the state of nature, abstracted from all 
religion, in those disputes which they may have, know no other 
law than that of all animals, the right of the strongest; the 
establishment of society ought to be regarded as a kind of treaty 
against this unjust title — a treaty destined to establish a sort 
of balance between the different divisions of the human race. 

But it happens in the moral, as in the physical equilibrium, 
that it is seldom perfect and stable, and the treaties of the human 
race are like treaties among our princes — perpetual sources of 
dispute. Interest, necessity, and pleasure made men associate 
together. The same motives urge them continually to desire 
the advantages of society without the burdens of it; and it is 
in this sense that we may say with our author that men, from 
the time they enter society, are in a state of war. For war sup- 
poses in those who make it, if not an equality of strength, at 
least an assumption of this equality: whence arise the nmtual 
desire and hope of conquest. Now, in a state of society, if the 
balance among men be never perfect, neither is it, on the other 
hand, very unequal. But, in a state of nature, on the contrary, 
they would either have nothing to dispute about, or, if neces- 

XV 



2Evi MONTESQUIEU 

sity obliged them to it, nothing would be seen but weakness 
flying before force, oppressors meeting with no resistance, and 
those who were oppressed tamely submitting. 

Behold, then, men, united and hostile at the same time, on 
one side, if we may be allowed the expression, embracing each 
other, and on the other endeavoring mutually to wound each 
other. Laws are the chains, more or less efficacious, which are 
destined to suspend or to restrain their blows. But the prodig- 
ious extent of the globe which we inhabit, the different nature of 
the regions of the earth, and of the people who are spread over 
it, not permitting that all mankind should live under one and the 
same government, the human race was obliged to divide itself 
into a certain number of states, distinguished by the difference 
of those laws to which they are subjected. Under one single 
government the human race would have been no more than 
one enfeebled and languishing body, extended without vigor 
over the surface of the earth. The different governments are so 
many robust and active bodies; by mutually assisting each 
other they form one whole, whose reciprocal action maintains 
and keeps up motion and life everywhere. 

Book II. — We may distinguish three sorts of governments: 
the republican, the monarchical, the despotic. In the republi- 
can, the people in a body possess the sovereign power. In the 
monarchical, one single person governs by fundamental laws. 
In the despotic, no other law is known than the will of a mas- 
ter, or rather of a tyrant. Not that there are in the universe 
only these three kinds of government, or that there are states 
which belong only and strictly to some one of these forms. For 
the greatest number of them the three forms are mixed or 
blended the one with the other. Here monarchy inclines to 
despotism; there the monarchical government is combined with 
the republican; elsewhere it is not the whole people, it is only 
a part of them, which make the laws. But the preceding division 
is not on that account the less just and exact. The three kinds 
of government which it includes are so distinguished that they 
have properly nothing in common ; and yet all the governments 
which we know participate the one in the other. It was, there- 
fore, necessary to form particular classes of these three kinds, 
and afterwards to determine the laws which are proper for each ; 
it would be easy afterwards to adapt those laws to any par- 



ANALYSIS xvii 

ticular government, according as it might belong more or less 
to one of those different forms. 

In different states the laws ought to have relation to their 
nature, that is to say, to that which constitutes them ; and to 
their principle, or, to that which supports them and puts them 
in motion : an important distinction, the key of an infinite 
number of laws, and from which the author draws many conse- 
quences. 

The principal laws in relation to the nature of democracy are, 
that the people be in some respects the monarch, and in others 
the subject; that it elect and judge of its magistrates, and that 
the magistrates on certain occasions pronounce decisions. The 
nature of monarchy requires that there be between the monarch 
and the people some body to whom the laws are intrusted, and 
which ought to be a mediator between the subject and the 
prince. The nature of despotism requires that the tyrant exer- 
cise his authority, either by himself alone or by one who repre- 
sents him. 

Book III. — As to the principle of the three governments, 
that of democracy is the love of the commonwealth, that is, of 
equality. In monarchies, where the single person is the dis- 
penser of distinctions and rewards, and where they are ac- 
customed to confound the state with this single man, the prin- 
ciple is honor, that is, ambition and the love of esteem. Lastly, 
under despotism, it is fear. The more vigorous these principles 
are, the more fixed the government is; the more these are 
altered and corrupted, the more it tends to its destruction. When 
the author speaks of equality in democracy, he does not mean 
an extreme, absolute, and consequently chimerical equality. He 
means that happy equilibrium which renders all the citizens 
equally subject to the laws and equally interested in observing 
them. 

Book IV. — In every government the laws of education ought 
to be in relation to the principle of that government. We 
understand here by education that which is received in en- 
tering upon the w^orld, and not that of parents and of school- 
masters, which is often contrary to it, especially in some states. 
In monarchies, education ought to have for its object polite- 
ness and reciprocal civilities; in despotic states, terror and the 
debasing of the spirits of men. In republics they have occasion 



xviii MONTESQUIEU 

for all the power of education; it ought to inspire a sentiment 
which is noble but hard to be attained, namely, that disregard 
of one's own interest whence arises the love of one's country. 

Book V. — The laws which the legislator makes ought to 
be conformed to the principle of each government — in a repub- 
lic, to maintain equality and frugality; in monarchy, to support 
the nobility without ruining the people; in a despotic govern- 
ment, to silence and to keep equally under subjection those of 
every condition, M. de Montesquieu ought not to be accused 
of having pointed out to sovereigns the principles of arbitrary 
power, the very name of which is so odious to a just prince, and 
still more so to a wise and virtuous citizen. To point out what 
is necessary to maintain it is to labor to destroy it; the perfec- 
tion of this government is its ruin, and an exact system of the 
laws of tyranny, such as our author describes to us, is at the 
same time a satire upon, and the most formidable scourge of, 
tyrants. With respect to other governments, they have each 
their advantages: the republican is more appropriate to small, 
the monarchical to great, states; the republican is more sub- 
jected to excesses, the monarchical to abuses; the republican 
executes the laws after more mature deliberation, the monarchi- 
cal with more promptitude. 

Books VI and VII. — The difference of the principles of 
the three governments must produce many differences in the 
number and object of laws, in the form of judgments, and the 
nature of punishments. The constitution of monarchies, being 
invariable and fundamental, requires more civil laws and tri- 
bunals that justice may be administered in the most uniform 
and least arbitrary manner. In moderated governments, be 
they monarchical or republican, there cannot be too many for- 
malities in criminal law. Punishments ought not only to be in 
proportion to the crime, but also as gentle as possible, espe- 
cially in a democracy: the opinion attached to punishments 
will often have more effect than their severity. In republics, 
judgment must be given according to law, because no individ- 
ual has the power to alter it. In monarchies, the clemency of 
the sovereign can sometimes soften the law; but crimes ought 
never to be judged there except by magistrates expressly in- 
trusted with that oflfice. Lastly, it is principally in democracies 
that the laws ought to be severe against luxury, looseness of 



ANALYSIS xix 

morals, and debauching of women. Their very softness and 
weakness render them fit enough to govern in monarchies; and 
history proves that they have often worn a crown with glory. 

Books VIII and IX, — M. de Montesquieu, having thus 
run over each government in particular, afterwards examines 
them in the relation which they may bear to each other, but 
only from the most general point of view, that is to say, from 
that which has reference only to their nature and their prin- 
ciple. Viewed in this light, states can have no relations but 
that of defending themselves or of attacking. Republics by 
their nature, supposing their state to be small, cannot defend 
themselves without alliances ; but it is with republics that they 
ought to ally themselves. The defensive force of a monarchy 
consists principally in having frontiers secured from insults. 

Book X. — States, like men, have a right to attack for their 
own preservation; from the right of war that of conquest is 
derived — a right necessary, lawful, calamitous, which always 
lays an immense debt upon us, if we would discharge what on 
that account becomes due from us to human nature, and the 
general law of which is to do as little harm as possible to the 
conquered. Republics can conquer less than monarchies; im- 
mense conquests suppose despotism already in a state, or render 
its approach certain. One of the great principles of the spirit of 
conquest ought to be to render the condition of the conquered 
as much better as possible; this is to fulfil, at once, the law of 
nature and a maxim of state. Nothing is more noble than that 
treaty of peace which Gelo made with the Carthaginians, by 
which he forbade them for the future to sacrifice their own 
children. The Spaniards, when they conquered Peru, ought in 
the same way to have obliged the inhabitants no more to have 
sacrificed men to their gods ; but they thought it more advan- 
tageous to sacrifice these people themselves. There remained 
nothing to them as a conquest but a vast desert; they were 
obliged to depopulate their own country, and forever weakened 
it by their own conquest of it. It may sometimes be necessary 
to change the laws of the conquered people; it can never be so, 
to deprive them of their observances, or even of their customs, 
which are often all they have for observances. But the surest 
way of retaining a conquest is to put, if it is possible, the con- 
quered on a level with the conquerors, to grant them the same 



XX MONTESQUIEU 

rights and the same privileges ; this the Romans often did, 
and thus especially Caesar acted with respect to the Gauls. 

Hitherto, when considering each sort of government, as well 
in itself as in its relation to others, we have neither taken notice 
of what ought to be common to all nor of those circumstances 
particular to each which arise either from the nature of the 
country or from the genius of the people. It is this which we 
must now explain. 

Book XL — That political liberty which every citizen ought 
to enjoy is the common law of all governments, at least moderate 
governments, and consequently just ones. This hberty is not 
an absurd license of doing everything we wish to do, but the 
power of doing everything that the laws permit. It may be 
considered either in its relation to the constitution or in its re- 
lation to the citizen. There are in the constitution of every state 
two sorts of power — the legislative and the executive ; and this 
last has two objects, its internal condition and its external re- 
lations. It is from the legitimate distribution and proper sub- 
division of these different powers that the greatest perfection 
of political liberty with relation to the constitution depends. M. 
de Montesquieu brings as a proof of this the constitution of the 
Roman republic and that of England. He finds the principle 
of the last in that fundamental law of the government of the 
ancient Germans, that affairs of small importance were deter- 
mined by the chiefs, and that great affairs were brought before 
the tribunal of the nation, after they had been first debated by 
them. M. de Montesquieu does not examine whether the Eng- 
lish enjoy actually or not that high political liberty which their 
constitution gives them; it is enough for him that it is estab- 
lished by their laws. He is still further from writing a satire 
upon other states; he believes, on the contrary, that an excess 
even of good is not always desirable; that extreme liberty, like 
extreme slavery, has its inconveniences, and that in general 
human nature is most adapted to a middling state of freedom. 

Book XII. — Political liberty, considered with relation to a 
citizen, consists in that security in which he lives under shel- 
ter of the laws, or at least in an opinion of this security which 
makes no one citizen entertain any fear of another. It is prin- 
cipally by the nature and proportion of punishments that this 
liberty is established or destroyed. Crimes against religion 



ANALYSIS xxi 

ought to be punished by deprivation of those advantages which 
reHgion procures; crimes against morahty, by disgrace; crimes 
against the public tranquillity, by imprisonment or banishment; 
crimes against its security, by extreme penalties. Writings 
ought to be less punished than actions; simple thoughts ought 
never to be so. Accusations which are not according to the 
forms of law, spies, anonymous letters, all those resources of 
tyranny which are equally disgraceful to those who are the 
instruments and to those who make use of them, ought to be 
proscribed in every good monarchical government. Nobody 
ought to be permitted to accuse but in face of the law, which 
always punishes either the accused person or the calumniator. 
In every other case those who govern ought to say, with the 
Emperor Constantius: "We cannot suspect a man against 
whom no accuser appeared, whilst at the same time he was not 
without an enemy." It is a very fine institution by which a 
public officer is charged, in the name of the state, with the prose- 
cution of crimes; for this answers all the good purposes served 
by informers without being exposed to those sordid interests, 
inconveniences, and that infamy which attend them. 

Book XIII. — The amount of taxation ought to be in a di- 
rect proportion to public liberty. Thus, in democracies taxes 
may be greater than elsewhere, without being burdensome, be- 
cause every citizen looks upon them as a tribute which he pays 
to himself, and which secures the tranquillity and fortune of 
every member of it. Besides, in a democratic state, an unjust 
application of the public revenue is more difficult, because it is 
easier to find it out and to punish it ; he who is intrusted with 
it being obliged to give an account of it, as it were, to the first 
citizen who requires it of him. 

In every government, of whatever sort, the least burdensome 
kind of tax is that which is laid upon merchandise, because the 
citizen pays without perceiving it. An excessive number of 
troops in time of peace is only an occasion for loading the peo- 
ple with taxes, a means of enervating the state, and an instru- 
ment of slavery. 

That administration of the revenues which makes the whole 
produce of it enter into the public treasury is beyond compari- 
son least expensive to the people, and consequently more ad- 
vantageous, when it can be adopted, than the farming out of 



xxii MONTESQUIEU 

these taxes, which always leaves in the hands of private persons 
part of the revenue of the state. But, above all, everything is 
ruined (these are the author's own words) when the profession 
of a farmer of the revenues becomes honorable, and it becomes 
so when luxury is at a great height. To permit some men to 
acquire vast fortunes out of what belongs to the public, to plun- 
der them in their turn, as was formerly practised in certain states, 
is to repair one injustice by another, and to commit two ills 
instead of one. 

Book XIV. — Let us now come, with M. de Montesquieu, 
to those particular circumstances which are independent of the 
nature of government, and to which laws ought to be adapted. 
The circumstances which arise from the nature of the country 
are of two sorts: the one has relation to the climate, the other 
to the soil. Nobody doubts but that the climate has an influ- 
ence upon the habitual disposition of the bodies, and conse- 
quently upon the characters, of men; on which account laws 
ought to be framed to accord with the nature of the climate in 
indifferent things, and to resist, on the other hand, its bad 
effects. Thus, in countries where the use of wine is hurtful, 
the law which forbids it is a very good one; in countries where 
the heat of the climate inclines people to laziness, that law which 
encourages labor is a very proper one. The government then 
can correct the effects of the climate, and this is enough to ob- 
viate that reproach which has been thrown upon " The Spirit 
of Laws," that it attributes everything to cold and heat; for, 
besides the fact that heat and cold are not the only circum- 
stances by which climates are distinguished, it would be as 
absurd to deny certain effects of climate as to attribute every- 
thing to it. 

Book XV. — The practice of having slaves, established in 
the warm countries of Asia and America, and rejected in the 
temperate climates of Europe, affords our author an opportunity 
of treating of slavery in a state. Men having no more right over 
the liberty than over the lives of each other, it follows that 
slavery, generally speaking, is against the law of nature. In 
effect, the right of slavery cannot arise from war, because it 
could not then be founded on anything but the redemption of 
an individual life, and nobody has a right over the life of those 
who no longer attack him; nor from that sale which a man may 



ANALYSIS xxiii 

make of himself to another, since every citizen, being account- 
able for his life to the state, is still more so for his liberty, and 
consequently has no title to sell it. Besides, what could be a 
proper price for such a sale? It cannot be the money given to 
the seller, because the moment he sells himself everything that 
belongs to him becomes the property of his master. Now a 
sale without a price is as chimerical as a contract without a con- 
dition. There could never be but one just law in favor of slavery ; 
this was that Roman law which made a debtor become the slave 
of a creditor; and even this law, to be equitable, ought to limit 
the slavery, both with respect to its degree and time of duration. 
Slavery can only be tolerated in despotic states, where freemen, 
too weak against the government, endeavor to become, for their 
own advantage, the slaves of those who tyrannize over the state, 
or in those climates where heat so enervates the body and weak- 
ens the courage that men cannot be incited to a laborious task 
save by the fear of punishment. 

Book XVI, — Near to civil slavery may be placed domestic 
slavery, or that in which women are kept in certain countries. 
This can only take place in those countries of Asia where they 
are in a condition to live with men before they can make use 
of their reason; marriageable by the law of the cHmate, chil- 
dren by that of nature. This subjection becomes still more 
necessary in those countries where polygamy is established, a 
custom which M. de Montesquieu does not pretend to justify, 
in so far as it is contrary to religion; but which, in places where 
it is received, and, only speaking politically, may have a foun- 
dation to a certain degree, either from the nature of the climate 
or the relation which the number of women bears to that of 
men. M. de Montesquieu speaks upon this occasion of repudia- 
tion and divorce, and he shows, from good reasons, that re- 
pudiation, once admitted, ought to be permitted to women as 
well as to men. 

Book XVII. — If the climate has so much influence on do- 
mestic and civil slavery, it has no less on political slavery; that 
is, upon what subjects one nation to another. The people in 
the North are stronger and more courageous than those of the 
South; the latter must then in general be conquered, the former 
conquerors; the one slaves, the other free. And history con- 
firms this; Asia has been eleven times conquered by the people 
of the North; Europe has suffered fewer revolutions. 



xxiv MONTESQUIEU 

Book XVIII. — With respect to laws in relation to the nat- 
ure of the soil, it is plain that democracy is better adapted than 
monarchy to barren countries, where the earth has occasion for 
all the industry of men. Besides, liberty, in this case, is a sort 
of recompense for the difificulty of labor. More laws are neces- 
sary for a people which follows agriculture than for one which 
tends flocks; and for the latter than for a hunting people; for 
a people which makes use of money, than for one that does not; 
in a word, the particular genius of a nation ought to be attended 

to. 

Book XIX. — Vanity, which magnifies objects, is a good 
spring for government; pride, which undervalues them, is a 
dangerous one. The legislator ought to respect, to a certain 
degree, prejudices, passions, abuses. He ought to imitate 
Solon, who gave the Athenians, not those laws which were best 
in themselves, but the best which they were capable of re- 
ceiving; the gay character of this people required gentle, the 
austere character of the Lacedaemonians severe, laws. Laws 
are a bad method of changing the manners and customs ; it is 
by rewards and example that we ought to endeavor to bring 
that about. It is, however, true, at the same time, that the 
laws of a people, when they do not grossly and directly tend to 
shock its manners, must insensibly have an influence upon 
them, either to confirm or change them. 

Book XX. — After having in this manner deeply considered 
the Nature and Spirit of Laws with relation to different kinds 
of climates and peoples, our author returns again to consider 
states in that relation which they bear to each other. At first, 
when comparing them in a general manner, he could only view 
them with respect to the harm which they can do each other; 
here he considers them with respect to that mutual succor which 
they can give. Now this succor is principally founded on com- 
merce. If the spirit of commerce naturally produces a spirit of 
interest, which is opposed to the sublimity of moral virtues, it 
also renders the people naturally just and averse to idleness and 
living on plunder. Free people who live under moderate gov- 
ernments must be more given to it than enslaved nations. No 
nation ought ever to exclude from its commerce another nation 
without great reasons. Besides, liberty in this way is not an 
absolute privilege granted to merchants to do what they will^ 



ANALYSIS XXV 

a power which would be often prejudicial to them; it consists 
in laying no restraint on merchants except for the advantage of 
commerce. In a monarchy, the nobihty ought not to have re- 
course to it, and still less the prince. In short, there are some 
nations to which commerce is disadvantageous, but they are 
not such as stand in need of nothing, but such as stand in need 
of everything; a paradox which our author renders intelligible 
by the example of Poland, which wants everything except corn, 
and which, by that commerce which it carries on in corn, de- 
prives the common people of the necessaries of life to gratify the 
luxury of the nobility. 

Book XXI. — M. de Montesquieu takes occasion, when treat- 
ing of those laws which commerce requires, to give us a his- 
tory of its different revolutions ; and this part of his book is 
neither the least interesting nor the least curious. He com- 
pares the impoverishment of Spain by the discovery of America 
to the fate of that weak prince in the fable, ready to perish for 
hunger, because he had requested of the gods that everything 
he touched should be turned into gold. 

Book XXII. — The use of money being one considerable 
part of the object of commerce, and its principal instrument, he 
was of opinion that he ought, in consequence of this, to treat of 
the different operations with respect to money, of exchange, of 
the payment of public debts, of lending out money for interest, 
the rules and limits of which he fixes, and which he distinguishes 
accurately from that excess so justly condemned as usury. 

Book XXIII. — Population and the number of inhabitants 
have an immediate connection with commerce; and marriages 
having population as their object, under this article M. de Mon- 
tesquieu goes to the root of this important subject. That which 
favors propagation most is general chastity; experience proves 
that illicit amours contribute very little, and even sometimes are 
prejudicial to it. The consent of fathers has with justice been 
required in marriages ; nevertheless some restrictions ought to 
be added, for the law ought in general to favor marriage. That 
law which forbids the marriage of mothers with their sons is, 
independently of the precepts of religion, a very good civil law; 
for, without mentioning several other reasons, the parties being 
of very different ages, this sort of marriages can rarely have 
propagation as their object. That law which forbids the mar- 



xxvi MONTESQUIEU 

riage of a father with a daughter is founded upon the same 
motives, although (speaking only in a political sense) it is not 
so indispensably necessary to the object of population as the 
other, because the power of propagating continues much longer 
in men; and the contrary custom has, besides, been estabhshed 
among certain nations which the Hght of Christianity had not 
illuminated. As nature of herself prompts to marriage, that 
must be a bad government which is obliged to encourage it. 
Liberty, security, moderate taxes, absence of luxury, are the 
true principles and supports of populousness. However, laws 
may, with success, be made to encourage marriage when, in 
spite of corruption, there is still something remaining in the 
people which attaches them to the love of their country. Noth- 
ing is finer than the laws of Augustus to promote the propaga- 
tion of the species. Unfortunately he made those laws in the 
decline, or rather after the downfall, of the republic; and the 
dispirited citizens must have foreseen that they would no longer 
propagate anything but slaves; and, indeed, the execution of 
those laws was very faint during all the time of the Pagan em- 
perors. At last Constantine abolished them when he became a 
Christian: as if Christianity had had in view to unpeople the 
world when it recommended the perfection of celibacy to a small 
number. 

The establishment of charitable institutions, according to the 
different spirit of these foundations, may be hurtful or favorable 
to population. There may, and indeed there ought to be, such 
institutions in a state where the greater part of the citizens are 
maintained by their industry, because this industry may some- 
times be unsuccessful ; but that relief which those institutions 
give ought to be only temporary, not to encourage beggary and 
idleness. The people are first to be made rich, and then alms- 
houses to be built for unforeseen and pressing occasions. Un- 
happy are those countries where the multitude of charities and 
of monasteries, which are only a kind of perpetual charities, 
makes all the world live at ease but those who work! 

Books XXIV and XXV.— M. de Montesquieu has hither- 
to only spoken of human laws; he now proceeds to those of 
religion, which in almost all states compose so essential an ob- 
ject of government. Everywhere he breaks forth into praises 
of Christianity; he points out its advantages and its grandeur; 



ANALYSIS xxvii 

he endeavors to make it beloved; he maintains that it is not 
impossible, as Bayle had pretended, that a society of perfect 
Christians should actually form a durable state. But he also 
thought that he might be permitted to examine what different 
religions, humanly speaking, might have been suitable or un- 
suitable to the genius and situation of those people who profess 
them. It is from this point of view that we must read all that 
he has written upon this article, and which has been the subject 
of so many unjust declamations. It is especially surprising that, 
in an age which presumes to call so many others barbarous, 
what he has said of toleration should be objected to as a crime 
— :as if approving and tolerating a religion were the same; as if 
the gospel itself did not forbid every other way of propagating 
it but that of meekness and persuasion. Those in whose heart 
superstition has not extinguished every sentiment of compassion 
and justice will not be able to read, without being moved, the 
Remonstrance to the Inquisitors, that odious tribunal, which 
outrageously affronts religion when it appears to avenge it. 

In fine, after having treated in particular of the different kinds 
of laws which men can have, there remains nothing more than 
to compare them all together, and to examine them in their re- 
lation to those things concerning which they prescribe rules. 

Book XXVI. — Men are governed by different kinds of laws : 
by natural law, common to each individual; by the divine 
law, which is that of religion; by the ecclesiastical law, which 
is that of the policy of religion ; by the civil law, which is that 
of the members of the same socety ; by the political law, which 
is that of the government of that society; by the law of nations, 
which is that of societies with respect to each other. These laws 
have each their distinct objects, which are carefully to be dis- 
criminated. That which belongs to the one ought never to be 
regulated by the other, lest disorder and injustice should be 
introduced into the principles which govern men. 

Books XXVI and XXIX. — In short, those principles which 
prescribe the nature of the laws, and which determine their 
objects, ought to prevail also in the manner of enacting them. 
A spirit of moderation ought, as much as possible, to dic- 
tate all their different dispositions. Laws that are properly 
made will conform to the intention of the legislator, even when 



xxviii MONTESQUIEU 

they appear to be in opposition to it. Such was the famous law 
of Solon, by which all who should not take some part in 
the public insurrections were declared infamous. It prevented 
seditions, or rendered them useful by forcing all the members 
of the republic to attend to its true interests. Even the ostracism 
was a good law; for, on the one hand, it was honorable to the 
citizen who was the object of it, and on the other it obviated 
the effects of ambition ; moreover, a great number of suffrages 
were necessary, and they could only banish every fifth year. 
Laws which appear the same have often neither the same motive 
nor the same effect nor the same equity. The form of govern- 
ment, different conjunctures, and the genius of the people quite 
change them. 

In fine, the style of laws ought to be simple and grave. They 
may dispense with giving reasons, because the reason is supposed 
to exist in the mind of the legislator; but when they do give 
reasons, they ought to be founded upon obvious principles; 
they ought not to resemble that law which, prohibiting blind 
people from pleading, gives this as a reason, that they cannot see 
the ornaments of magistracy. 

Books XXVII and XXVIII. — M. de Montesquieu, to point 
out by examples the application of his principles, has chosen 
two dift'erent people, the most celebrated in the world, and 
those whose history most interests us — the Romans and the 
French. He only dwells upon one point of the jurisprudence 
of the former — that which regards succession. With regard to 
the French, he enters into a greater detail concerning the origin 
and revolutions of their civil laws, and the different usages abol- 
ished or still subsisting which have been the consequences of 
them. 

Books XXX and XXXI . — He principally enlarges upon 
the feudal laws, that kind of government unknown to all an- 
tiquity, which will perhaps forever be so to future ages, and 
which has done so much good and so much ill. He especially 
considers these laws in their relation to the establishment and 
revolutions of the French monarchy. He proves, against the 
Abbe du Bos, that the Franks actually entered as conquerors 
among the Gauls; and that it is not true, as this author pretends, 
that they had been called by the people to succeed to the rights 



ANALYSIS xxix 

of the Roman emperors who oppressed them; an investigation 
profound, exact, and curious, but in which it is impossible for 
us to follow him. 

Such is the general analysis, though a very imperfect one, of 
M. de Montesquieu's work on " The Spirit of Laws." 



MONTESQUIEU'S PREFACE 

IF amidst the infinite number of subjects contained in this 
book there is anything which, contrary to my expectation, 
may possibly offend, I can at least assure the public that 
it was not inserted with an ill intention — for I am not naturalh 
of a captious temper. Plato thanked the gods that he was born 
in the same age with Socrates; and for my part I give thanks 
to the Supreme that I was born a subject of that government 
under which 1 live, and that it is His pleasure I should obey 
those whom He has made me love. 

I beg one favor of my readers, which I fear will not be granted 
me; this is, that they will not judge by a few hours' reading 
of the labor of twenty years; that they will approve or condemn 
the book entire, and not a few particular phrases. If they would 
search into the design of the author, they can do it in no other 
way so completely as by searching into the design of the work. 

I have first of all considered mankind, and the result of my 
thoughts has been, that amidst such an infinite diversity of laws 
and manners, they were not solely conducted by the caprice 
of fancy. 

I have laid down the first principles, and have found that the 
particular cases follow naturally from them; that the histories 
of all nations are only consequences of them; and that every 
particular law is connected with another law, or depends on 
some other of a more general extent. 

When I have been obliged to look back into antiquity I have 
endeavored to assume the spirit of the ancients, lest I should 
consider those things as alike which are really different, and 
lest I should miss the difference of those which appear to be 
alike. 

I have not drawn my principles from my prejudices, but from 
the nature of things. 

xxxl 



Kxxii MONTESQUIEU 

Here a great many truths will not appear till we have seen 
the chain which connects them with others. The more we enter 
into particulars, the more we shall perceive the certainty of the 
principles on which they are founded. I have not even given 
all these particulars, for who could mention them all without a 
most insupportable fatigue? 

The reader will not here meet with any of those bold flights 
which seem to characterize the works of the present age. When 
things are examined with never so small a degree ot extent, the 
sallies of imagination must vanish; these generally arise from 
the mind's collecting all its powers to view only one side of the 
subject, while it leaves the other unobserved. 

I write not to censure anything established in any country 
whatsoever. Every nation will here find the reasons on which 
its maxims are founded; and this will be the natural inference, 
that to propose alterations belongs only to those who are so 
happy as to be born with a genius capable of penetrating the 
entire constitution of a state. 

It is not a matter of indifiference that the minds of the people 
be enlightened. The prejudices of magistrates have arisen from 
national prejudice. In a time of ignorance they have commit- 
ted even the greatest evils without the least scruple; but in an 
enlightened age they even tremble while conferring the greatest 
blessings. They perceive the ancient abuses; they see how they 
must be reformed ; but they are sensible also of the abuses of a 
reformation. They let the evil continue, if they fear a worse; 
they are content with a lesser good, if they doubt a greater. 
They examine into the parts, to judge of them in connection; 
and they examine all the causes, to discover their different effects. 

Could I but succeed so as to afford new reasons to every man 
to love his prince, his country, his laws; new reasons to render 
him more sensible in every nation and government of the bless- 
ings he enjoys, I should think myself the most happy of mortals. 

Could I but succeed so as to persuade those who command 
to increase their knowledge in what they ought to prescribe, and 
those who obey to find a new pleasure resulting from obedience 
— I should think myself the most happy of mortals. 

The most happy of mortals should I think myself could I 
contribute to make mankind recover from their prejudices. By 
prejudices I here mean, not that which renders men ignorant 



PREFACE xxxiii 

of some particular things, but whatever renders them ignorant 
of themselves. 

It is in endeavoring to instruct mankind that we are best 
able to practice that general virtue which comprehends the love 
of all. Man, that flexible being, conforming in society to the 
thoughts and impressions of others, is equally capable of know- 
ing his own nature whenever it is laid open to his view, and of 
losing the very sense of it when this idea is banished from his 
mind. 

Often have I begun, and as often have I laid aside, this un- 
dertaking. I have a thousand times given the leaves I had 
written to the winds : a I, every day, felt my paternal hands fall.&amp; 
I have followed my object without any fixed plan — I have 
known neither rules nor exceptions; I have found the truth, 
only to lose it again. But when I once discovered my first prin- 
ciples, everything I sought for appeared; and in the course of 
twenty years I have seen my work begun, growing up, advanc- 
ing to maturity, and finished. 

If this work meets with success I shall owe it chiefly to the 
grandeur and majesty of the subject. However, I do not think 
that I have been totally deficient in point of genius. When I 
have seen what so many great men, in France, in England, and 
in Germany, have said before me, I have been lost in admira- 
tion; but I have not lost my courage: I have said with Cor- 
reggio, " And I also am a painter.'V 

a Ludibria ventis. b Bis patriae cecidere manus. 

c Ed io anche son pittore. 



AUTHORS EXPLANATORY NOTES 

1. For the better understanding of the first four books of this 
work, it is to be observed that what I distinguish by the name 
of virtue, in a repubHc, is the love of one's country, that is, the 
love of equality. It is not a moral, nor a Christian, but a politi- 
cal virtue; and it is the spring which sets the republican gov- 
ernment in motion, as honor is the spring which gives motion 
to monarchy. Hence it is that I have distinguished the love 
of one's country, and of equality, by the appellation of political 
virtue. My ideas are new, and therefore I have been obliged 
to find new words, or to give new acceptations to old terms, in 
order to convey my meaning. They, who are unacquainted 
with this particular, have made me say most strange absurdities, 
such as would be shocking in any part of the world, because in 
all countries and governments morality is requisite. 

2. The reader is also to notice that there is a vast difference 
between saying that a certain quality, modification of the mind, 
or virtue, is not the spring by which government is actuated, 
and af^rming that it is not to be found in that government. 
Were 1 to say such a wheel or such a pinion is not the spring 
which sets the w&lt;itch going, can you infer thence that it is 
not to be found in the watch? So far is it from being true that 
the moral and Christian virtues are excluded from monarchy, 
that even political virtue is not excluded. In a word, honor is 
found in a republic, though its spring be political virtue; and 
political virtue is found in a monarchical government, though 
it be actuated by honor. 

To conclude the honest man of whom we treat in the third 
book, chapter 5, is not the Christian, but the political honest 
man, who is possessed of the political virtue there mentioned. 
He is the man who loves the laws of his country, and who is 

XXXV 



xxxvi MONTESQUIEU 

actuated by the love of those laws. I have set these matters in 
a clearer light in the present edition by giving a more precise 
meaning to my expression : and in most places where I have 
made use of the word virtue I have taken care to add the term 
political. 



CHOICE EXAMPLES OF BOOK ILLUMINATION. 

Fac-similes from Illuminated Manuscripts and Illustrated Books 

of Early Date. 



DAVID SLAYING GOLIATH. 

From the Mount Olivet Psalter, written about 1 490, probably at Sienna. 

This is an exquisite page from a Psalter written for a patron or superior of the 
Monks of St. Olivet. In the Renaissance border, on three of the sides, are set little 
oval pictures, including a Savior, and a saint in steel armor. In the lower border an 
oblong space contains a picture of the death of Goliath, with a charming landscape 
in the background. The beauty of the decorative design, the harmony of colors, 
and the effectiveness of the little paintings in the border, all combine to make this 
fac-simile a delightful example of Italian art at the close of the fifteenth century. 







^^^7^~li&amp; 



- ---^ 



JimomicdittWK. 

-rtiQzcmonadvtt/.iD i^ 
montie oUuctiaiii^f ! 

fVcimir iu^pUcce : ur ii 
diiinno »ictib.'»:no? la- 
ucr^ncccntib^. m 

nc litio bojH)^ ifcct : ui^ 
l«mlK&gt;ucwcoiitC0^4t- [ 
ncuanitmoboimar; 
^^' lilt Y&gt; irni cpidtG I tiin 
abfiibt I iiccojdi4 :ca 
ui0 tcmt lujbiii ;pot 
abicj,mit:iC*. tciidi 
CO .ibKclFir:na*tcc)? o 
foic irdinir : miidi ^ 
.ibihncruf i\3i cmiain" ^^ 
vjiuim . CO yi\ fir 9ft • 
aufq? Iblitt- cttfv p'ld* 
to tnc I m ^ptmu . Aiia 







ibyr lucoiifiUo mxyxo 
mill :i iiiuu fccoui no 
^iknr : i laitixozii \x\W 
^cndfcdit, cdinVojc 
tliii uoluutio ci : T ilaK 
iaiw tncditsbj die ^ax&gt; 
tc, teittin^?ligim5^ 

juolplantatit c tccW 
TiK' 4qUiim : qi5 tnictii 
fuiixwbir lutcmp: fuo. 
t fblui cuu? no xvrtm. 
ct amw t^ucciuji? Uact 
pfp.ibnt. onliciin 
'pi\ no fic : f5 wmp yul 



ri 




ILLUSTRATIONS 



FACING PAGE 



Baron de Montesquieu (Portrait) 
Photogravure from a wood engraving 



Frontispiece 



XXXVl 



io8 



David Slaying Goliath 

Fac-simile Illumination of the Fifteenth Century 

A Page from the Monte Santo di Dio 

Fac-simile example of Printing in the Fifteenth Century 

Augustus 206 

Photo-engraving from a marble statue 

A Page from the Psalmorum Codex 

Fac-simile example of Printing in the Fifteenth Century 



ZZ&lt;^ 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 

BOOK I 

OF LAWS IN general; 

I.— 0/ the Relation of Lazvs to different Beings 

LAWS, in their most general signification, are the neces- 
sary relations arising from the nature of things. In 
this sense all beings have their laws : the Deityc His 
laws, the material world its laws, the intelligences superior to 
man their laws, the beasts their laws, man his laws. 

They who assert that a blind fatality produced the various 
effects we behold in this world talk very absurdly ; for can any 
thing be more unreasonable than to pretend that a blind fatality 
could be productive of intelligent beings ? 

There is, then, a prime reason ; and laws are the relations 
subsisting between it and different beings, and the relations of 
these to one another. 

God is related to the universe, as Creator and Preserver ; the 
laws by which He created all things are those by which He 
preserves them. He acts according to these rules, because He 
knows them ; He knows them, because He made them ; and 
He made them, because they are in relation of His Wisdom and 
power. 

Since we observe that the world, though formed by the mo- 
tion of matter, and void of understanding, subsists through so 
long a succession of ages, its motions must certainly be directed 
by invariable laws ; and could we imagine another world, it 
must also have constant rules, or it would inevitably perish. 

Thus the creation, which seems an arbitrary act, supposes 
laws as invariable as those of the fatality of the Atheists. It 

a " Law," says Plutarch, ' is the king his treatise entitled " A Discourse to an 
of mortal and immortal beings." See unlearned Prince." 

Vol. I.— I J. 



a MONTESQUIEU 

would be absurd to say that the Creator might govern the 
world without those rules, since without them it could not sub- 
sist. 

These rules are a fixed and invariable relation. In bodies 
moved, the motion is received, increased, diminished, or lost, 
according to the relations of the quantity of matter and veloc- 
ity ; each diversity is uniformity, each change is constancy. 

Particular intelligent beings may have laws of their own 
making, but they have some likewise which they never made. 
Before there were intelligent beings, they were possible ; they 
had therefore possible relations, and consequently possible 
laws. Before laws were made, there were relations of possible 
justice. To say that there is nothing just or unjust but what 
is commanded or forbidden by positive laws, is the same as 
saying that before the describing of a circle all the radii were 
not equal. 

We must therefore acknowledge relations of justice ante- 
cedent to the positive law by which they are established : as, 
for instance, if human societies existed, it would be right to 
conform to their laws ; if there were intelligent beings that 
had received a benefit of another being, they ought to show 
their gratitude ; if one intelligent being had created another 
intelligent being, the latter ought to continue in its original 
state of dependence ; if one intelligent being injures another, 
it deserves a retaliation ; and so on. 

But the intelligent world is far from being so well governed 
as the physical. For though the former has also its laws, which 
of their own nature are invariable, it does not conform to them 
so exactly as the physical world. This is because, on the one 
hand, particular intelligent beings are of a finite nature, and 
consequently liable to error ; and on the other, their nature re- 
quires them to be free agents. Hence they do not steadily con- 
form to their primitive laws ; and even those of their own in- 
stituting they frequently infringe. 

Whether brutes be governed by the general laws of motion, 
or by a particular movement, we cannot determine. Be that 
as it may, they have not a more intimate relation to God than 
the rest of the material world ; and sensation is of no other use 
to them than in the relation they have either to other particular 
beings or to themselves. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 3 

By the allurement of pleasure they preserve the individual, 
and by the same allurement they preserve their species. They 
have natural laws, because they are united by sensation ; posi- 
tive laws they have none, because they are not connected by 
knowledge. And yet they do not invariably conform to their 
natural laws ; these are better observed by vegetables, that 
have neither understanding nor sense. 

Brutes are deprived of the high advantages which we have ; 
but they have some which we have not. They have not our 
hopes, but they are without our fears ; they are subject like us 
to death, but without knowing it ; even most of them are more 
attentive than we to self-preservation, and do not make so bad 
a use of their passions. 

Man, as a physical being, is like other bodies governed by 
invariable laws. As an intelligent being, he incessantly trans- 
gresses the laws established by God, and changes those of his 
own instituting. He is left to his private direction, though a 
limited being, and subject, like all finite intelligences, to ig- 
norance and error : even his imperfect knowledge he loses ; 
and as a sensible creature, he is hurried away by a thousand 
impetuous passions. Such a being might every instant forget 
his Creator ; God has therefore reminded him of his duty by the 
laws of religion. Such a being is liable every moment to for- 
get himself; philosophy has provided against this by the laws 
of morality. Formed to live in society, he might forget his 
fellow-creatures; legislators have, therefore, by political and 
civil laws, confined him to his duty. 

2. — Of the Lazvs of Nature 

Antecedent to the above-mentioned laws are those of nature, 
so called, because they derive their force entirely from our 
frame and existence. In order to have a perfect knowledge of 
these laws, we must consider man before the establishment of 
society: the laws received in such a state would be those of 
nature. 

The law which, impressing on our minds the idea of a Crea- 
tor, inclines us towards Him, is the first in importance, though 
not in order, of natural laws. Man in a state of nature would 
have the faculty of knowing, before he had acquired any know!- 



4 MONTESQUIEU 

edge. Plain it is that his first ideas would not be of a speculative 
nature ; he would think of the preservation of his being, be- 
fore he would investigate its origin. Such a man would feel 
nothing in himself at first but impotency and weakness ; his 
fears and apprehensions would be excessive ; as appears from 
instances (were there any necessity of proving it) of savages 
found in forests,^ trembling at the motion of a leaf, and flying 
from every shadow. 

In this state every man, instead of being sensible of his equal- 
ity, would fancy himself inferior. There would, therefore, be 
no danger of their attacking one another ; peace would be the 
first law of nature. 

The natural impulse or desire which Hobbes attributes to 
mankind of subduing one another is far from being well 
founded. The idea of empire and dominion is so complex, and 
depends on so many other notions, that it could never be the 
first which occurred to the human understanding. 

Hobbesc inquires, " For what reason go men armed, and have 
locks and keys to fasten their doors, if they be not naturally 
in a state of war ? " But is it not obvious that he attributes to 
mankind before the establishment of society what can happen 
but in consequence of this establishment, which furnishes them 
with motives for hostile attacks and self-defence? 

Next to a sense of his weakness man would soon find that of 
his wants. Hence another law of nature would prompt him 
to seek for nourishment. 

Fear, I have observed, would induce men to shun one an- 
other ; but the marks of this fear being reciprocal, would soon 
engage them to associate. Besides, this association would 
quickly follow from the very pleasure one animal feels at the 
approach of another of the same species. Again, the attrac- 
tion arising from the difference of sexes would enhance this 
pleasure, and the natural inclination they have for each other 
would form a third law. 

Besides the sense or instinct which man possesses in com- 
mon with brutes, he has the advantage of acquired knowledge ; 
and thence arises a second tie, which brutes have not. Man- 

&amp; Witness the savage found in the for- over to England during the reign of 
ests of Hanover, who was carried George I. 

c In praefat. lib. " de Cive. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 5 

kind have, therefore, a new motive of uniting; and a fourth 
law of nature results from the desire of living in society. 



3. — Of positive Laws 

As soon as man enters into a state of society he loses the 
sense of his weakness ; equality ceases, and then commences the 
state of war.d 

Each particular society begins to feel its strength, whence 
arises a state of war between different nations. The individuals 
likewise of each society become sensible of their force ; hence 
the principal advantages of this society they endeavor to con- 
vert to their own emolument, which constitutes a state of war 
between individuals. 

These two different kinds of states give rise to human laws. 
Considered as inhabitants of so great a planet, which neces- 
sarily contains a variety of nations, they have laws relating to 
their mutual intercourse, which is what we call the law of 
nations. As members of a society that must be properly sup- 
ported, they have laws relating to the governors and the gov- 
erned, and this we distinguish by the name of politic law. They 
have also another sort of laws, as they stand in relation to each 
other ; by which is tmderstood the civil law. 

The law of nations is naturally founded on this principle, 
that different nations ought in time of peace to do one another 
all the good they can, and in time of war as little injury as pos- 
sible, without prejudicing their real interests. 

The object of war is victory ; that of victory is conquest ; 
and that of conquest preservation. From this and the preced- 
ing principle all those rules are derived which constitute the 
law^ of nations. 

All countries have a law of nations, not excepting the Iro- 
quois themselves, though they devour their prisoners : for they 
send and receive aml^assadors, and understand the rights of 
war and peace. The mischief is that their law of nations is not 
founded on true principles. 

d Interpreter and admirer of the social Rovisseau to celebrate the independence 
instinct as he was, ^Iontesquieu has not of savage life, gives birth to the whole- 
hesitated to avow that war fakes simul- some necessity of laws which are an 
taneous rise with society. But the true armistic-e between states, and a treaty 
philosopfiy of this unhappy truth, which of perpetual peace for the citizens 
Hobbcs took advantage of in order to (Eloge de Montesquieu), 
vaunt the serenity of despotism, and 



6 MONTESQUIEU 

Besides the law of nations relating to all societies, there is a 
polity or civil constitution for each particularly considered. 
No society can subsist without a form of government. " The 
united strength of individuals," as Gravina^ well observes, 
" constitutes what we call the body politic." 

The general strength may be in the hands of a single person, 
or of many. Some think that nature having established pater- 
nal authority, the most natural government was that of a single 
person. But the example of paternal authority proves nothing. 
For if the power of a father relates to a single government, that 
of brothers after the death of a father, and that of cousins-ger- 
man after the decease of brothers, refer to a government of 
many. The political power necessarily comprehends the union 
of several families. 

Better is it to say that the government most conformable 
to nature is that which best agrees with the humor and disposi- 
tion of the people in whose favor it is established. 

The strength of individuals cannot be united without a con- 
junction of all their wills. " The conjunction of those wills," 
as Gravina again very justly observes, " is what we call the 
civil state." 

Law in general is human reason, inasmuch as it governs all 
the inhabitants of the earth : the political and civil laws of each 
nation ought to be only the particular cases in which human 
reason is applied. 

They should be adapted in such a manner to the people for 
whom they are framed that it should be a great chance if those 
of one nation suit another. 

They should be in relation to the nature and principle of each 
government : whether they form it, as may be said of politic 
laws ; or whether they support it, as in the case of civil institu- 
tions. 

They should be in relation to the climate of each country, 
to the quality of its soil, to its situation and extent, to the prin- 
cipal occupation of the natives, whether husbandmen, hunts- 
men, or shepherds : they should have relation to the degree of 
liberty which the constitution will bear; to the religion of the 
inhabitants, to their inclinations, riches, numbers, commerce, 
manners, and customs. In fine, they have relations to each 

* An Italian poet and jurist, 1664 — 1718. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 7 

Other, as also to their origin, to the intent of the legislator, and 
to the order of things on which they are established ; in all of 
which different lights they ought to be considered. 

This is what I have undertaken to perform in the following 
work. These relations I shall examine, since all these together 
constitute what I call the Spirit of Laws, 

I have not separated the political from the civil institutions, 
as I do not pretend to treat of laws, but of their spirit ; and as 
this spirit consists in the various relations which the laws may 
bear to different objects, it is not so much my business to fol- 
low the natural order of laws as that of these relations and ob- 
jects. 

'I shall first examine the relations which laws bear to the 
nature and principle of each government ; and as this prin- 
ciple has a strong inflvience on laws, I shall make it my study 
to understand it thoroughly : and if I can but once establish it, 
the laws will soon appear to flow thence as from their source. I 
shall proceed afterwards to other and more particular relations. 



BOOK II 

OF LAWS DIRECTLY DERIVED FROM THE 
NATURE OF GOVERNMENT 

I. — Of the Nature of three different Governments 

THERE are three species of government: republican, 
monarchical, and despotic. In order to discover their 
nature, it is sufficient to recollect the common notion, 
which supposes three definitions, or rather three facts : that a 
republican government is that in which the body, or only a part 
of the people, is possessed of the supreme power ; monarchy, 
that in which a single person governs by fixed and established 
laws ; a despotic government, that in which a single person 
directs everything by his own will and caprice. 

This is what I call the nature of each government ; we must 
now inquire into those laws which directly conform to this 
nature, and consequently are the fundamental institutions. 

2. — Of the Republican Government, and the Laws in relation 

to Democracy a 

When the body of the people is possessed of the supreme 
power, it is called a democracy. When the supreme power is 
lodged in the hands of a part of the people, it is then an aristoc- 
racy. 

In a democracy the people are in some respects the sover- 
eign, and in others the subject. 

There can be no exercise of sovereignty but by their suf- 
frages, which are their own will ; now, the sovereign's will 
is the sovereign himself. The laws, therefore, which establish 
the right of suffrage are fundamental to this government. And 

a Compare Aristotle's " Polit." lib. fundamental laws of democratic consti« 
VI. cap. ii., wherein are exposed the tutions. — Ed. 

8 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 9 

indeed it is as important to regulate in a republic, in what man- 
ner, by whom, to whom, and concerning what suffrages are 
to be given, as it is in a monarchy to know who is the prince, 
and after what manner he ought to govern. 

Libanius^ says that at " Athens a stranger who intermeddled 
in the assemblies of the people was punished with death." This 
is because such a man usurped the rights of sovereignty.^ 

It is an essential point to fix the number of citizens who are 
to form the public assemblies ; otherwise it would be uncertain 
whether the whole or only a part of the people had given their 
votes. At Sparta the number was fixed at ten thousand. But 
Rome, designed by Providence to rise from the weakest be- 
ginnings to the highest pitch of grandeur ; Rome, doomed to 
experience all the vicissitudes of fortune ; Rome, who had 
sometimes all her inhabitants without her walls, and sometimes 
all Italy and a considerable part of the world within them ; 
Rome, I say, never fixed the number ;&lt;i and this was one of the 
principal causes of her ruin. 

The people, in whom the supreme power resides, ought to 
have the management of everything within their reach : that 
which exceeds their abilities must be conducted by their min- 
isters. 

But they cannot properly be said to have their ministers, 
without the power of nominating them : it is, therefore, a 
fundamental maxim in this government, that the people should 
choose their ministers — that is, their magistrates. 

They have occasion, as well as monarchs, and even more so, 
to be directed by a council or senate. But to have a proper 
confidence in these, they should have the choosing of the mem- 
bers ; whether the election be made by themselves, as at 
Athens, or by some magistrate deputed for that purpose, as on 
certain occasions was customary at Rome.e 

The people are extremely well qualified for choosing those 
whom they are to intrust with part of their authority. They 
have only to be determined by things to which they cannot 
be strangers, and by facts that are obvious to sense. They can 

b Declam. 17 and 18. d See the " Considerations on the 

c Libanius himself pives the reason Causes of the Grandeur and Decline of 
for this law. " It was," he avers, " in Ihc Romans," chap. ix. 
order to prevent the secrets of the re- c The Roman senators were invariably 

public from being divulged." — Ed. chosen by maRistrates in whom the peo- 

ple had vested the power. — Crevier. 



lo MONTESQUIEU 

tell when a person has fought many battles, and been crowned 
with success ; they are, therefore, capable of electing a gen- 
eral. They can tell when a judge is assiduous in his office, gives 
general satisfaction, and has never been charged with bribery : 
this is sufficient for choosing a praetor. They are struck with 
the magnificence or riches of a fellow-citizen ; no more is 
requisite for electing an edile. These are facts of which they 
can have better information in a public forum than a monarch 
in his palace. But are they capable of conducting an intricate 
affair, of seizing and improving the opportunity and critical 
moment of action ? No ; this surpasses their abilities. 

Should we doubt the people's natural capacity, in respect 
to the discernment of merit, we need only cast an eye on the 
series of surprising elections made by the Athenians and 
Romans ; which no one surely will attribute to hazard. 

We know that though the people of Rome assumed the right 
of raising plebeians to public offices, yet they never would ex- 
ert this power ; and though at Athens the magistrates were al- 
lowed, by the law of Aristides, to be elected from all the 
different classes of inhabitants, there never was a case, says 
Xenophon,&lt;^ when the common people petitioned for em- 
ployments which could endanger either their security or their 
glory. 

As most citizens have sufficient ability to choose, though 
unqualified to be chosen, so the people, though capable of call- 
ing others to an account for their administration, are incapa- 
ble of conducting the administration themselves. 

The public business must be carried on with a certain mo- 
tion, neither too quick nor too slow. But the motion of the 
people is always either too remiss or too violent. Sometimes 
with a hundred thousand arms they overturn all before them ; 
and sometimes with a hundred thousand feet they creep like 
insects. 

In a popular state the inhabitants are divided into certain 
classes. It is in the manner of making this division that great 
legislators have signalized themselves ; and it is on this the 
duration and prosperity of democracy have ever depended. 

Servius Tullius followed the spirit of aristocracy in the dis- 
tribution of his classes. We find in Livy^ and in Dionysius 

e Pages 691 and 692. Edit. Wechel. Ann. 1596. / Lib. I. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS ii 

Halicarnassus? in what manner he lodged the right of suffrage 
in the hands of the principal citizens. He had divided the peo- 
ple of Rome into 193 centuries, which formed six classes ; and 
ranking the rich, who were in smaller numbers, in the first 
centuries, and those in middling circumstances, who were more 
numerous, in the next, he flung the indigent multitude into the 
last; and as each century had but one voteji it was property 
rather than numbers that decided the election. 

Solon divided the people of Athens into four classes. In 
this he was directed by the spirit of democracy, his intention 
not being to fix those who were to choose, but such as were 
eligible : therefore, leaving to every citizen the right of elec- 
tion, he madei the judges eligible from each of those four 
classes ; but the magistrates he ordered to be chosen only out 
of the first three, consisting of persons of easy fortunes.; 

As the division of those who have a right of suffrage is a 
fundamental law in republics, so the manner of giving this 
suffrage is another fundamental. 

The suffrage by lot is natural to democracy ; as that by 
choice is to aristocracy.^ 

The suffrage by lot is a method of electing that offends no 
one, but animates each citizen with the pleasing hope of serving 
his country.^ 

Yet as this method is in itself defective, it has been the en- 
deavor of the most eminent legislators to regulate and amend 
it. 

Solon made a law at Athens that military employments 
should be conferred by choice ; but that senators and judges 
should be elected by lot. 

The same legislator ordained that civil magistracies, attended 
with great expense, should be given by choice, and the others 
by lot. 

In order, however, to amend the suffrage by lot, he made 
a rule that none but those who presented themselves should be 

g Lib. IV. art. 15 et scq. k Ibid. lib. IV. cap. i.x. 

h See in the " Considerations on the / The mere suffrage might occasion 

Causes of the Grandeur and Decline of mortification to those who were ex- 

the Romans," chap, ix., how this spirit eluded, and undue pride to the favored 

of Servius Tullius was preserved in the ones. It was in order to avoid this 

republic. contingency that they had recourse to 

i Dionysius Halicarn., " Kulogium of lot, and thus chance precluded this dan- 

Isocrates," p. ay, torn. ii. Edit. Wechel. gcr, for it does not deal in humiliation 

" Pollux," VTII. cap. X. art. 130. or inflation. — Servan. 

/ See Aristotle's " Polit." lib. II. cap. 
xii. 



12 



MONTESQUIEU 



elected; that the person elected should be examined by jndges,»w 
and that every one should have a right to accuse him if he 
were unworthy of the office;" this participated at the same time 
of the suffrage by lot and of that by choice. When the time 
of their magistracy had expired, they were obliged to submit 
to another judgment in regard to their conduct. Persons ut- 
terly unqualified must have been extremely backward in giv- 
ing in their names to be drawn by lot. 

The law which determines the manner of giving suffrage is 
likewise fundamental in a democracy. It is a question of some 
importance whether the suffrages ought to be public or secret. 
Cicero observes^ that the laws/' which rendered them secret 
towards the close of the republic were the cause of its decline. 
But as this is differently practised in different republics, I shall 
offer here my thoughts concerning this subject. 

The people's suffrages ought doubtless to be public ;« and 
this should be considered as a fundamental law of democracy. 
The lower class ought to be directed by those of higher rank, 
and restrained within bounds by the gravity of eminent per- 
sonages. Hence, by rendering the suffrages secret in the 
Roman republic, all was lost ; it was no longer possible to di- 
rect a populace that sought its own destruction. But when the 
body of the nobles are to vote in an aristocracy ,&amp; or in a de- 
mocracy the senate,^ as the business is then only to prevent 
intrigues, the suffrages cannot be too secret. 

Intriguing in a senate is dangerous ; it is dangerous also in 
a body of nobles ; but not so among the people, whose nature 
is to act through passion. In countries where they have no 
share in the government, we often see them as much inflamed 
on account of an actor as ever they could be for the welfare 
of the state. The misfortune of a republic is when intrigues 
are at an end ; which happens when the people are gained by 



m See the oration of Demosthenes de 
falsa legat. and the oration against 
Timarchus. 

« They used even to draw two tickets 
for each place, one which gave the 
place, and the other which named the 
person who was to succeed, in case the 
first was rejected.* 

o Lib. I. and Til. " de Leg." 

p They were called Leges Tabulares ; 
two tablets were presented to each citi- 
zen, the first marked with an A, for 
" Antique, " or " I forbid it"; and the 
other with a U and an R, for " Uti 
Rogas," or " Be it as you desire." 



a At Athens the people used to lift up 
their hands. 

b As at Venice. 

c The thirty tyrants at Athens ordered 
the suffrages of the Areopagites to be 
public, in order to manage tliem as they 
pleased.— Lysias, " Orat. contra Ago- 
rat.," cap. viii. 

* These two tickets sufficed when the 
people were called upon to deliberate in 
a question of law; but in the election of 
magistrates, each citizen received as 
many tickets as there were candidates. — 
Crevier. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 13 

bribery and corruption : in this case they grow indififerent to 
pubHc affairs, and avarice becomes their predominant passion. 
Unconcerned about the government and everything belonging 
to it, they quietly wait for their hire. 

It is likewise a fundamental law in democracies, that the 
people should have the sole power to enact laws. And yet 
there are a thousand occasions on which it is necessary the 
senate should have the power of decreeing ; nay, it is frequently 
proper to make some trial of a law before it is established. The 
constitutions of Rome and Athens were excellent — the de- 
crees of the senate^ had the force of laws for the space of a year, 
but did not become perpetual till they were ratified by the 
consent of the people. 

3. — Of the Laws in relation to the Nature of Aristocracy 

In an aristocracy the supreme power is lodged in the hands 
of a certain number of persons. These are invested both with 
the legislative and executive authority ; and the rest of the 
people are, in respect to them, the same as the subjects of a 
monarchy in regard to the sovereign. 

They do not vote here by lot, for this would be productive 
of inconveniences only. And indeed, in a government where 
the most mortifying distinctions are already established, though 
they were to be chosen by lot, still they would not cease to be 
odious ; it is the nobleman they envy, and not the magistrate. 

When the nobility are numerous, there must be a senate to 
regulate the affairs which the body of the nobles are incapable 
of deciding, and to prepare others for their decision. In this 
case it may be said that the aristocracy is in some measure in 
the senate, the democracy in the body of the nobles, and the 
people are a cipher. 

It would be a very happy thing in an aristocracy if the peo- 
ple, in some measure, could be raised from their state of anni- 
hilation. Thus at Genoa, the bank of St. George being ad- 
ministered by the people^ gives them a certain influence in the 
government, whence their whole prosperity is derived. 

The senators ought by no means to have the right of naming 
their own members ; for this would be the only way to per- 

rf See Dionys. Halicarn. lib. IV and a See Mr. Addison's " Travels to 

IX. Italy," p. 16. 



14 MONTESQUIEU 

petuate abuses. At Rome, which in its early years was a 
kind of aristocracy, the senate did not fill up the vacant places 
in their own body; the new members were nominated by the 
censors.^ 

In a republic, the sudden rise of a private citizen to exor- 
bitant power produces monarchy, or something more than 
monarchy. In the latter the laws have provided for, or in some 
measure adapted themselves to, the constitution ; and the prin- 
ciple of government checks the monarch : but in a republic, 
where a private citizen has obtained an exorbitant power,c the 
abuse of this power is much greater, because the laws foresaw 
it not, and consequently made no provision against it. 

There is an exception to this rule, when the constitution is 
such as to have immediate need of a magistrate invested with 
extraordinary power. Such was Rome with her dictators, such 
is Venice with her state inquisitors ; these are formidable magis- 
trates, who restore, as it were by violence, the state to its liberty. 
But how comes it that these magistracies are so very different in 
these two republics? It is because Rome supported the re- 
mains of her aristocracy against the people ; whereas Venice 
employs her state inquisitors to maintain her aristocracy 
against the nobles. The consequence was, that at Rome the 
dictatorship could be only of short duration, as the people 
acted through passion and not with design. It was necessary 
that a magistracy of this kind should be exercised with lustre 
and pomp, the business being to intimidate, and not to punish, 
the multitude. It was also proper that the dictator should be 
created only for some particular affair, and for this only should 
have an unlimited authority, as he was always created upon 
some sudden emergency. On the contrary, at Venice they have 
occasion for a permanent magistracy ; for here it is that 
schemes may be set on foot, continued, suspended, and re- 
sumed ; that the ambition of a single person becomes that of a 
family, and the ambition of one family that of many. They 
have occasion for a secret magistracy, the crimes they punish 
being hatched in secrecy and silence. This magistracy must 
have a general inquisition, for their business is not to remedy 
known disorders, but to prevent the unknown. In a word, the 

b They were named at first by the con- Rome. See " Considerations on the 
8uls. Causes of the Grandeur and Decline of 

e This is what ruined the republic of the Romans." 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 15 

latter is designed to punish suspected crimes ; whereas the 
former used rather menaces than punishment even for crimes 
that were openly avowed. 

In all magistracies, the greatness of the power must be com- 
pensated by the brevity of the duration. This most legislators 
have fixed to a year ; a longer space would be dangerous, and 
a shorter would be contrary to the nature of government. For 
who is it that in the management even of his domestic affairs 
would be thus confined? At Ragusa^^ the chief magistrate of 
the republic is changed every month, the other officers every 
week, and the governor of the castle every day. But this can 
take place only in a small republic environed^? by formidable 
powers, who might easily corrupt such petty and insignificant 
magistrates. 

The best aristocracy is that in which those who have no 
share in the legislature are so few and inconsiderable that the 
governing party have no interest in oppressing them. Thus 
whenf Antipater made a law at Athens, that whosoever was 
not worth two thousand drachms should have no power to 
vote, he formed by this method the best aristocracy possible ; 
because this was so small a sum as to exclude very few, and 
not one of any rank or consideration in the city. 

Aristocratic families ought, therefore, as much as possible, 
to level themselves in appearance with the people. The more 
an aristocracy borders on democracy, the nearer it approaches 
perfection : and, in proportion as it draws towards monarchy, 
the more is it imperfect. 

But the most imperfect of all is that in which the part of 
the people that obeys is in a state of civil servitude to those 
who command, as the aristocracy of Poland, where the peas- 
ants are slaves to the nobility. 

4. — Of the Relation of Laws to the Nature of Monarchical 

Government 

The intermediate, subordinate, and dependent powers con- 
stitute the nature of monarchical government ; I mean of that 
in which a single person governs by fundamental laws. I said 
the intermediate, subordinate, and dependent powers. And, 

rfTournofort's " Vo;ya)?es." /^ Diodorus, lib. XVIII, p 6oi, Rhod- 

e At Lucca the magistrates are chosen Oman's edition, 
only for two months. 



i6 MONTESQUIEU 

indeed, in monarchies the prince is the source of all power, 
political and civil. These fundamental laws necessarily sup- 
pose the intermediate channels through which the power flows : 
for if there be only the momentary and capricious will of a sin- 
gle person to govern the state, nothing can be fixed, and, of 
course, there is no fundamental law. 

The most natural, intermediate, and subordinate power is 
that of the nobility. This in some measure seems to be essen- 
tial to a monarchy, whose fundamental maxim is, no monarch, 
no nobility ; no nobility, no monarch ; but there may be a 
despotic prince.s: 

There are men who have endeavored in some countries in 
Europe to suppress the jurisdiction of the nobility, not per- 
ceiving that they were driving at the very thing that was done 
by the Parliament of England. Abolish the privileges of the 
lords, the clergy and cities in a monarchy, and you will soon 
have a popular state, or else a despotic government. 

The courts of a considerable kingdom in Europe have, for 
many ages, been striking at the patrimonial jurisdiction of the 
lords and clergy. We do not pretend to censure these sage 
magistrates ; but we leave it to the public to judge how far this 
may alter the constitution. 

Far am I from being prejudiced in favor of the privileges 
of the clergy ; however, I should be glad if their jurisdiction 
were once fixed. The question is not, whether their jurisdic- 
tion was justly established ; but whether it be really estab- 
lished ; whether it constitutes a part of the laws of the country, 
and is in every respect in relation to those laws : whether be- 
tween two powers acknowledged independent, the conditions 
ought not to be reciprocal ; and whether it be not equally the 
duty of a good subject to defend the prerogative of the prince, 
and to maintain the limits which from time immemorial have 
been prescribed to his authority. 

Though the ecclesiastic power be so dangerous in a republic, 
yet it is extremely proper in a monarchy, especially of the 
absolute kind. What would become of Spain and Portugal, 
since the subversion of their laws, were it not for this only bar- 
rier against the incursions of arbitrary power? a barrier ever 
useful when there is no other : for since a despotic government 

g This maxim brings to mind the un- IV of France declared to the Seize, 
.fortunate Charles I, who said, "No "No nobility, no monarch!" — Voltaire. 
bishop, no monarchy "; while Henry 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 17 

is productive of the most dreadful calamities to human nature, 
the very evil that restrains it is beneficial to the subject. 

In the same manner as the ocean, threatening to overflow 
the whole earth, is stopped by weeds and pebbles that lie scat- 
tered along the shore,/* so monarchs, whose power seems un- 
bounded, are restrained by the smallest obstacles, and suffer 
their natural pride to be subdued by supplication and prayer. 

The English, to favor their liberty, have abolished all the 
intermediate powers of which their monarchy was composed.* 
They have a great deal of reason to be jealous of this liberty ; 
were they ever to be so unhappy as to lose it, they would be 
one of the most servile nations upon earth. 

Mr. Law, through ignorance both of a republican and mon- 
archical constitution, was one of the greatest promoters of ab- 
solute power ever known in Europe. Besides the violent and 
extraordinary changes owing to his direction, he would fain 
suppress all the intermediate ranks, and abolish the political 
communities. He was dissolving; the monarchy by his chi- 
merical reimbursements, and seemed as if he even wanted to 
redeem the constitution. 

It is not enough to have intermediate powers in a monarchy ; 
there must be also a depositary of the laws. This depositary 
can only be the judges of the supreme courts of justice, who 
promulgate the new laws, and revive the obsolete. The natural 
ignorance of the nobility, their indolence and contempt of civil 
government, require that there should be a body invested with 
the power of reviving and executing the laws, which would be 
otherwise buried in oblivion. The prince's council are not a 
proper depositary. They are naturally the depositary of the 
momentary will of the prince, and not of the fundamental laws. 
Besides, the prince's council is continually changing; it is 
neither permanent nor numerous ; neither has it a sufficient 
share of the confidence of the people ; consequently it is incapa- 
ble of setting them right in difficult conjunctures, or of reduc- 
ing them to proper obedience. 

Despotic governments, where there are no fundamental 
laws, have no such kind of depositary. Hence it is that religion 
has generally so much influence in those countries, because it 

h Voltaire Is inclined to doubt the jus- auRmented that of the Commons.— 

tice of this comparison. — Ed. Voltaire. 

i On the contrary, the Enplish have /Ferdinand, Kinp of Aragon, made 

rendered the power of their spiritual and himself prand-master of the orders, and 

temporal lords more legal, and have that alone changed the constitution. 

Vol.. I.— 2 



i8 MONTESQUIEU 

forms a kind of permanent depositary ; and if this cannot be 
said of religion, it may of the customs that are respected instead 
of laws. 

5- — Of the Lazvs in relation to the Nature of a despotic 

Government 

From the nature of despotic power it follows that the single 
person, invested with this power, commits the execution of it 
also to a single person. A man whom his senses continually 
inform that he himself is everything and that his subjects are 
nothing, is naturally lazy, voluptuous, and ignorant. In conse- 
quence of this, he neglects the management of public affairs. 
But were he to commit the administration to many, there would 
be continual disputes among them ; each would form intrigues 
to be his first slave ; and he would be obliged to take the reins 
into his own hands. It is, therefore, more natural for him to 
resign it to a vizier,^ and to invest him with the same power as 
himself. The creation of a vizier is a fundamental law of this 
government. 

It is related of a pope, that he had started an infinite num- 
ber of difficulties against his election, from a thorough con- 
viction of his incapacity. At length he was prevailed on to ac- 
cept of the pontificate, and resigned the administration entirely 
to his nephew. He was soon struck with surprise, and said, 
" I should never have thought that these things were so easy." 
The same may be said of the princes of the East, who, being 
educated in a prison where eunuchs corrupt their hearts and 
debase their understandings, and where they are frequently 
kept ignorant even of their high rank, when drawn forth in 
order to be placed on the throne, are at first confounded : 
but as soon as they have chosen a vizier, and abandoned them- 
selves in their seraglio to the most brutal passions, pursuing, 
in the midst of a prostituted court, every capricious extrava- 
gance, they would never have dreamed that they could find 
matters so easy. 

The more extensive the empire, the larger the seraglio ; and 
consequently the more voluptuous the prince. Hence the more 
nations such a sovereign has to rule, the less he attends to the 
cares of government ; the more important his affairs, the less 
he makes them the subject of his deliberations. 

k The Eastern kings are never without viziers, says Sir John Chardin. 



BOOK III 

OF THE PRINCIPLES OF THE THREE KINDS OF 

GOVERNMENT 

I. — Difference between the Nature and Principle of 

Government 

HAVING examined the laws in relation to the nature of 
each government, we must investigate those which re- 
late to its principle. 
There is this difference between the nature and principle^ 
of government, that the former is that by which it is consti- 
tuted, the latter that by which it is made to act. One is its par- 
ticular structure, and the other the human passions which set 
it in motion. 

Now, laws ought no less to relate to the principle than to the 
nature of each government. We must, therefore, inquire into 
this principle, wdiich shall be the subject of this third book. 

2. — Of the Principle of different Governments 

I have already observed that it is the nature of a republican 
government, that cither the collective body of the people, or 
particular families, should be possessed of the supreme power ; 
of a monarchy that the prince should have this power, but in 
the execution of it should be directed by established laws ; of a 
despotic government, that a single person should rule accord- 
ing to his own will and caprice. This enables me to discover 
their three principles ; which are thence naturally derived. I 
shall begin with a republican government, and in particular 
with that of democracy. 

a This is a very important di'stinction, for it is the key of an infinite numbci 
whence I shall draw many consequences; of laws. 

19 



20 MONTESQUIEU 

3. — Of the Principle of Democracy 

There is no great share of probity necessary to support a 
monarchical or despotic government. The force of laws in 
one, and the prince's arm in the other, are sufficient to direct 
and maintain the whole. But in a popular state, one spring 
more is necessary, namely, virtue. 

What I have here advanced is confirmed by the unanimous 
testimony of historians, and is extremely agreeable to the 
nature of things.^ For it is clear that in a monarchy, where 
he who commands the execution of the laws generally thinks 
himself above them, there is less need of virtue than in a pop- 
ular government, where the person intrusted with the execu- 
tion of the laws is sensible of his being subject to their direc- 
tion. 

Clear is it also that a monarch who, through bad advice or 
indolence, ceases to enforce the execution of the laws, may 
easily repair the evil ; he has only to follow other advice, or 
to shake off this indolence. But when, in a popular govern- 
ment, there is a suspension of the laws, as this can proceed only 
from the corruption of the republic, the state is certainly un- 
done. 

A very droll spectacle it was in the last century to behold 
the impotent efforts of the English towards the establishment 
of democracy. As they who had a share in the direction of 
public affairs were void of virtue ; as their ambition was in- 
flamed by the success of the most daring of their members ;c 
as the prevailing parties were successively animated by the 
spirit of faction, the government was continually changing: 
the people, amazed at so many revolutions, in vain attempted 
to erect a commonwealth. At length, when the country had 
undergone the most violent shocks, they were obliged to have 
recourse to the very government which they had so wantonly 
proscribed. 

When Sylla thought of restoring Rome to her liberty, this 
unhappy city was incapable of receiving that blessing. She 
had only the feeble remains of virtue, which were continually 

h It has always been argued against whereas he has said nothing ef the sort, 

Montesquieu that he has said that there and to allege it even is to suppose him 

can only be virtue in republics, and capable of a great absurdity. — La Harpe. 

honor in monarchies, or vice versa: c Cromwell. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 21 

diminishing. Instead of being roused from her lethargy by 
Caesar, Tiberius, Caius Claudius, Nero, and Domitian, she 
riveted every day her chains ; if she struck some blows, her aim 
was at the tyrant, not at the tyranny. 

The politic Greeks, who lived under a popular government, 
knew no other support than virtue. The modern inhabitants 
of that country are entirely taken up with manufacture, com- 
merce, finances, opulence, and luxury. 

When virtue is banished, ambition invades the minds of those 
who are disposed to receive it, and avarice possesses the whole 
community. The objects of their desires are changed; what 
they were fond of before has become indifferent ; they were 
free while under the restraint of laws, but they would fain now 
be free to act against law ; and as each citizen is like a slave 
who has run away from his master, that which was a maxim 
of equity he calls rigor ; that which was a rule of action he 
styles constraint ; and to precaution he gives the name of fear. 
Frugality, and not the thirst of gain, now passes for avarice. 
Formerly the wealth of individuals constituted the public 
treasure; but now this has become the patrimony of private 
persons. The members of the commonwealth riot on the pub- 
lic spoils, and its strength is only the power of a few, and the 
license of many. 

Athens was possessed of the same number of forces when 
she triumphed so gloriously as when with such infamy she was 
enslaved. She had twenty thousand citizens,^ when she de- 
fended the Greeks against the Persians, when she contended 
for empire with Sparta, and invaded Sicily. She had twenty 
thousand when Demetrius Phalereus numbered ihem,e as 
slaves are told by the head in a market-place. When Philip 
attempted to lord it over Greece, and appeared at the gates of 
Athens/ she had even then lost nothing but time. We may 
see in Demosthenes how difificult it was to awaken her ; she 
dreaded Philip, not as the enemy of her liberty, but of her pleas- 
ures.g This famous city, which had withstood so many de- 
feats, and having been so often destroyed had as often risen out 

tf Plutarch, "Life of Pericles"; Plato, f She had then twenty thousand citi- 

in " Critia." zens. See Demosthenes in " Aristog." 

e She had at that time twenty-one g They had passed a law, which ren- 

thousand citizens, ten thousand stran- dered it a capital crime for any one to 

fers, and four hundred thousand slaves. propose applying the money designed 

ee Athenaeus, book VI. lor the theatres to military service. 



22 MONTESQUIEU 

of her ashes, was overthrown at Chgeronea, and at one blow 
deprived of all hopes of resource. What does it avail her that 
Philip sends back her prisoners, if he does not return her men ? 
It was ever after as easy to triumph over the forces of Athens as 
it had been difficult to subdue her virtue. 

How was it possible for Carthage to maintain her ground? 
When Hannibal, upon his being made praetor, endeavored to 
hinder the magistrates from plundering the republic, did not 
they complain of him to the Romans ? Wretches, who would 
fain be citizens without a city, and be beholden for their riches 
to their very destroyers ! Rome soon insisted upon having 
three hundred of their principal citizens as hostages ; she 
obliged them next to surrender their arms and ships ; and then 
she declared war./^ From the desperate efiforts of this defence- 
less city, one may judge of what she might have performed in 
her full vigor, and assisted by virtue 

4. — Of the Principle of Aristocracy 

As virtue is necessary in a popular government, it is requisite 
also in an aristocracy. True it is that in the latter it is not so 
absolutely requisite. 

The people, who in respect to the nobility are the same as the 
subjects with regard to a monarch, are restrained by their laws. 
They have, therefore, less occasion for virtue than the people 
in a democracy. But how are the nobility to be restrained? 
They who are to execute the laws against their colleagues will 
immediately perceive that they are acting against themselves. 
Virtue is therefore necessary in this body, from the very nature 
of the constitution. 

An aristocratic government has an inherent vigor, unknown 
to democracy. The nobles form a body, who by their preroga- 
tive, and for their own particular interest, restrain the people ; 
it is sufficient that there are laws in being to see them executed. 

But easy as it may be for the body of the nobles to restrain 
the people, it is difficult to restrain themselves.^ Such is the 
nature of this constitution, that it seems to subject the very 
same persons to the power of the laws, and at the same time 
to exempt them. 

h This lasted three years. private crimes will go unpunished, be- 

i Public crimes may be punished, be- cause it is the common interest not to 
cause it is here a common concern; but punish them. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



23 



Now such a body as this can restrain itself only in two ways ; 
either by a very eminent virtue, which puts the nobility iia 
some measure on a level with the people, and may be the means 
of forming a great republic; or by an inferior virtue, which 
puts them at least upon a level with one another, and upon this 
their preservation depends. 

Moderation is therefore the very soul of this government; 
a moderation, I mean, founded on virtue, not that which pro- 
ceeds from indolence and pusillanimity. 

5- — That Virtue is not the Principle of a Monarchical 

Government 

In monarchies policy effects great things with as little virtue 
as possible. Thus in the nicest machines, art has reduced the 
number of movements, springs, and wheels. 

The state subsists independently of the love of our country, 
of the thirst of true glory, of self-denial, of the sacrifice of our 
dearest interests, and of all those heroic virtues which we ad- 
mire in the ancients, and to us are known only by tradition. 

The laws supply here the place of those virtues ; they are by 
no means wanted, and the state dispenses with them : an ac- 
tion performed here in secret is in some measure of no conse- 
quence. 

Though all crimes be in their own nature public, yet there 
is a distinction between crimes really public and those that are 
private, which are so called because they are more injurious 
to individuals than to the community. 

Now in republics private crimes are more public, that is, 
they attack the constitution more than they do individuals ; 
and in monarchies, public crimes are more private, that is, they 
are more prejudicial to private people than to the constitution. 

I beg that no one will be offended with what I have been say- 
ing; my observations are founded on the unanimous testi- 
mony of historians. I am not ignorant that virtuous princes 
are so very rare ; but I venture to affirm, that in a monarchy 
it is extremely difficult for the people to be virtuous./ 

Let us compare what the historians of all ages have asserted 

y I speak here of political virtue, that virtue which relates to revealed 

which is also moral virtue as it is di- truths. This will appear better, book 

reeled to the public good; very little of V., chap. 2. 
private moral virtue, and not at all of 



24 MONTESQUIEU 

concerning the courts of monarchs ; let us recollect the con- 
versations and sentiments of people of all countries, in respect 
to the wretched character of courtiers, and we shall find that 
these are not airy speculations, but truths confirmed by a sad 
and melancholy experience. 

Ambition in idleness ; meanness mixed with pride ; a desire 
of riches without industry ; aversion to truth ; flattery, perfidy, 
violation of engagements, contempt of civil duties, fear of the 
prince's virtue, hope from his weakness, but, above all, a per- 
petual ridicule cast upon virtue, are, I think, the characteris- 
tics by which most courtiers in all ages and countries have 
been constantly distinguished. Now, it is exceedingly difficult 
for the leading men of the nation to be knaves, and the inferior 
sort to be honest ; for the former to be cheats, and the latter to 
rest satisfied with being only dupes. 

But if there should chance to be some unlucky honest man^ 
among the people. Cardinal Richelieu, in his political testa- 
ment, seems to hint that a prince should take care not to employ 
him./ So true is it that virtue is not the spring of this govern- 
ment! It is not indeed excluded, but it is not the spring of 
government. 

6. — In what Manner Virtue is Supplied in a Monarchical 

Government 

But it is high time for me to have done with this subject, 
lest I should be suspected of writing a satire against mon- 
archical government. Far be it from me ; if monarchy wants 
one spring, it is provided with another. Honor, that is, the 
prejudice of every person and rank, supplies the place of the 
political virtue of which I have been speaking, and is every- 
where her representative: here it is capable of inspiring the 
most glorious actions, and, joined with the force of laws, may 
lead us to the end of government as well as virtue itself. 

Hence, in well-regulated monarchies, they are almost all 
good subjects, and very few good men; for to be a good man,w 
a good intention is necessary ,w and we should love our coun- 

k This is to be understood in the sense m This word " good man " is unden 

of the preceding note. stood here in a political sense only. 

/ We must not, says he, employ peo- n See note /, page 23. 

pie of mean extraction; they are too 
rigid and morose. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 25 

try, not so much on our own account, as out of regard to the 
community. 

7. — Of the Principle of Monarchy 

A monarchical government supposes, as we have already ob- 
served, pre-eminences and ranks, as likewise a noble descent. 
Now, since it is the nature of honor to aspire to preferments and 
titles,^ it is properly placed in this government. 

Ambition is pernicious in a republic. But in a monarchy 
it has some good effects ; it gives life to the government, and is 
attended with this advantage, that it is in no way dangerous, 
because it may be continually checked. 

It is with this kind of government as with the system of the 
universe, in which there is a power that constantly repels all 
bodies from the centre, and a power of gravitation that attracts 
them to it. Honor sets all the parts of the body politic in mo- 
tion, and by its very action connects them ; thus each indi- 
vidual advances the public good, while he only thinks of pro- 
moting his own interest. 

True it is, that philosophically speaking it is a false honor 
which moves all the parts of the government; but even this 
false honor is as useful to the public as true honor could pos- 
sibly be to private persons. 

Is it not very exacting to oblige men to perform the most 
difficult actions, such as require an extraordinary exertion of 
fortitude and resolution, without other recompense than that of 
glory and applause? 

8. — That Honor is not the Principle of Despotic Government. 

Honor is far from being the principle of despotic govern- 
ment: mankind being here all upon a level, no one person 
can prefer himself to another ; and as on the other hand they 
are all slaves, they can give themselves no sort of preference. 

Besides, as honor has its laws and rules ; as it knows not how 
to submit ; as it depends in a great measure on a man's own 
caprice, and not on that of another person : it can be found only 

a These preferments, distinctions, and dom of to-day. Prefectures, consuLites, 

honors, in the days of the Roman re- axes, fasces, and triumphs were valued 

public, were worth quite as mucli as the at the price of so many colored ribbons, 

debris which goes to constitute a king- — Voltaire. 



26 MONTESQUIEU 

in countries in which the constitution is fixed, and where they 
are governed by settled laws. 

How can despotism abide with honor? The one glories in 
the contempt of life ; and the other is founded on the power 
of taking it away. How can honor, on the other hand, bear 
with despotism ? The former has its fixed rules, and pecuHar 
caprices ; but the latter is directed by no rule, and its own 
caprices are subversive of all others. 

Honor, therefore, a thing unknown in arbitrary govern- 
ments, some of which have not even a proper word to express 
it,t is the prevailing principle in monarchies ; here it gives life 
to the whole body politic, to the laws, and even to the virtues 
themselves. 

9. — Of the Principle of Despotic Government 

As virtue is necessary in a republic, and in a monarchy honor, 
so fear is necessary in a despotic government : with regard to 
virtue, there is no occasion for it, and honor would be ex- 
tremely dangerous. c 

Here the immense power of the prince devolves entirely 
upon those whom he is pleased to intrust with the administra- 
tion. Persons capable of setting a value upon themselves 
would be likely to create disturbances. Fear must therefore 
depress their spirits, and extinguish even the least sense of 
ambition. 

A moderate government may, whenever it pleases, and with- 
out the least danger, relax its springs. It supports itself by 
the laws, and by its own internal strength. But when a despotic 
prince ceases for one single moment to uplift his arm, when he 
cannot instantly demolish those whom he has intrusted with 
the first employmentSjt^ all is over : for as fear, the spring of 
this government, no longer subsists, the people are left with- 
out a protector. 

It is probably in this sense the Cadis maintained that the 
Grand Seignior was not obliged to keep his word or oath, when 
he limited thereby his authority.^ 

b See Perry, p. 447. construct a series of his ideas, and that 

c It has been thought that Montes- his motives should be conceived. 

quieu anticipated innumerable difficul- d As it often happens in a military 

ties, if he entered upon his plan, and in aristocracy.— Ed. 

his own style began to refute objections. e Ricaut on the Ottoman Empire. 

It is evident that his only desire was to 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 27 

It is necessary that the people should be judged by laws, 
and the great men by the caprice of the prince, that the lives 
of the lowest subject should be safe, and the pasha's head ever 
in danger. We cannot mention these monstrous governments 
without horror. The Sophi of Persia, dethroned in our days 
by Mahomet, the son of Aliriveis, saw the constitution sub- 
verted before this resolution, because he had been too sparing 
of blood. /^ 

History informs us that the horrid cruelties of Domitian 
struck such a terror into the governors, that the people re- 
covered themselves a little during his reign.g Thus a torrent 
overflows one side of a country, and on the other leaves fields 
untouched, where the eye is refreshed by the prospect of fine 
meadows, 

10. — Difference of Obedience in Moderate and Despotic 

Governments 

In despotic states, the nature of government requires the 
most passive obedience ; and when once the prince's will is 
made known, it ought infallibly to produce its effect. 

Here they have no limitations or restrictions, no mediums, 
terms, equivalents, or remonstrances ; no change to propose : 
man is a creature that blindly submits to the absolute will of the 
sovereign. 

In a country like this they are no more allowed to represent 
their apprehensions of a future danger than to impute their 
miscarriage to the capriciousness of fortune. Man's portion 
here, like that of beasts, is instinct, compliance, and punish- 
ment. 

Little does it then avail to plead the sentiments of nature, 
filial respect, conjugal or parental tenderness, the laws of honor, 
or want of health ; the order is given, and that is sufficient. 

In Persia, when the king has condemned a person, it is no 
longer lawful to mention his name, or to intercede in his favor. 
Even if the prince were intoxicated, or non compos, the decree 
must be executed -h otherwise he would contradict himself, and 
the law admits of no contradiction. This has been the way of 
thinking in that country in all ages ; as the order which 

/ See the history of this revolution by which is one of the species of despotic 
Father Ducerceau. government. 

g His was a military constitution, /i See Sir John Chardin. 



28 MONTESQUIEU 

Ahasuenis gave, to exterminate the Jews, could not be re- 
voked,' they were allowed the liberty of defending themselves.; 

One thing, however, may be sometimes opposed to the 
prince's will,'-' namely, religion. They will abandon, nay they 
will slay a parent, if the prince so commands ; but he cannot 
oblige them to drink wine. The laws of religion are of a 
superior nature, because they bind the sovereign as well as the 
subject. But with respect to the law of nature, it is otherwise; 
the prince is no longer supposed to be a man. 

In monarchical and moderate states, the power is limited by 
its very spring, I mean by honor, which, like a monarch, reigns 
over the prince and his people. They will not allege to their 
sovereign the laws of religion ; a courtier would be apprehen- 
sive of rendering himself ridiculous. But the laws of honor 
will be appealed to on all occasions. Hence arise the restric- 
tions necessary to obedience ; honor is naturally subject to 
whims, by which the subject's submission will be ever directed. 

Though the manner of obeying be dififerent in these two 
kinds of government, the power is the same. On which side 
soever the monarch turns, he inclines the scale, and is obeyed. 
The whole difference is, that in a monarchy the prince receives 
instruction, at the same time that his ministers have greater 
abihties, and are more versed in public affairs, than the minis- 
ters of a despotic government. 

II. — Reflections on the preceding Chapters 

Such are the principles of the three sorts of government: 
which does not imply that in a particular republic they actually 
are, but that they ought to be, virtuous ; nor does it prove that 
in a particular monarchy they are actuated by honor, or in a 
particular despotic government by fear ; but that they ought 
to be directed by these principles, otherwise the government 
is imperfect. 

i This order was revoked by a new minate them. So terrible was the suc- 

edict. See Esther, xvi., 7. — Ed. cess of the Jews that it was in memory 

j The Jews were not allowed to defend of the event that the feast of Purim was 

themselves, as the author avers, but to instituted. — De Dupin. 

exterminate their enemies, as it had k See Sir John Chardin. 
been permitted their enemies to exter- 



BOOK IV 

THAT THE LAWS OF EDUCATION OUGHT TO BE 
IN RELATION TO THE PRINCIPLES OF GOV- 
ERNMENT 

I. — Of the Laws of Education 

THE laws of education are the first impressions we re- 
ceive ; and as they prepare us for civil life, every private 
family ought to be governed by the plan of that great 
household which comprehends them all. 

If the people in general have a principle, their constituent 
parts, that is, the several families, will have one also. The laws 
of education will be therefore different in each species of gov- 
ernment : in monarchies they will have honor for their object ; 
in republics, virtue ; in despotic governments, fear. 

2. — Of Education in Monarchies 

In monarchies the principal branch of education is not 
taught in colleges or academies. It commences, in some meas- 
ure, at our setting out in the world ; for this is the school of 
what we call honor, that universal preceptor which ought 
everywhere to be our guide. 

Here it is that we constantly hear three rules or maxims, viz., 
that we should have a certain nobleness in our virtues, a kind 
of frankness in our morals, and a particular politeness in our 
behavior. 

The virtues we are here taught are less what we owe to others 
than to ourselves ; they are not so much what draws us towards 
society, as what distinguishes us from our fellow-citizens. 

Here the actions of men are judged, not as virtuous, but as 
shining : not as just, but as great ; not as reasonable, but as 
extraordinary. 

29 



30 MONTESQUIEU 

When honor here meets with anything noble in our actions, 
it is either a judge that approves them, or a sophist by whom 
they are excused. 

It allows of gallantry when united with the idea of sensible 
affection, or with that of conquest ; this is the reason why we 
never meet with so strict a purity of morals in monarchies as in 
republican governments. 

It allows of cunning and craft, when joined with the notion 
of greatness of soul or importance of affairs ; as, for instance, 
in politics, with finesses of which it is far from being offended. 

It does not forbid adulation, save when separated from the 
idea of a large fortune, and connected only with the sense of 
our mean condition. 

With regard to morals, I have observed that the education 
of monarchies ought to admit of a certain frankness and open 
carriage. Truth, therefore, in conversation is here a necessary 
point. But is it for the sake of truth ? By no means. Truth 
is requisite only because a person habituated to veracity has 
an air of boldness and freedom. And indeed a man of this 
stamp seems to lay a stress only on the things themselves, not 
on the manner in which they are received. 

Hence it is that in proportion as this kind of frankness is 
commended, that of the common people is despised, which has 
nothing but truth and simplicity for its object. 

In fine, the education of monarchies requires a certain polite- 
ness of behavior. Man, a sociable animal, is formed to please 
in society ; and a person that would break through the rules 
of decency, so as to shock those he conversed with, would lose 
the public esteem, and become incapable of doing any good. 

But politeness, generally speaking, does not derive its origin 
from so pure a source. It arises from a desire of distinguish- 
ing ourselves. It is pride that renders us polite ; we are flat- 
tered with being taken notice of for behavior that shows we 
are not of a mean condition, and that we have not been bred 
with those who in all ages are considered the scum of the people. 

Politeness, in monarchies, is naturalized at court. One man 
excessively great renders everybody else little. Hence that 
regard which is paid to our fellow-subjects ; hence that polite- 
ness, equally pleasing to those by whom, as to those towards 
whom, it is practised, because it gives people to understand 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 31 

that a person actually belongs, or at least deserves to belong, 
to the court. 

A courtly air consists in quitting a real for a borrowed great- 
ness. The latter pleases the courtier more than the former. 
It inspires him with a certain disdainful modesty, which shows 
itself externally, but whose pride insensibly diminishes in pro- 
portion to its distance from the source of this greatness. 

At court we find a delicacy of taste in everything — a delicacy 
arising from the constant use of the superfluities of life, from the 
variety, and especially the satiety, of pleasures, from the mul- 
tiplicity and even confusion of fancies, which, if they are but 
agreeable, are sure of being well received. 

These are the things which properly fall within the province 
of education, in order to form what we call a man of honor, a 
man possessed of all the qualities and virtues requisite in this 
kind of government. 

Here it is that honor interferes with everything, mixing even 
with people's manner of thinking, and directing their very prin- 
ciples. 

To this whimsical honor it is owing that the virtues are only 
just what it pleases ; it adds rules of its own invention to every- 
thing prescribed to us ; it extends or limits our duties according 
to its own fancy, whether they proceed from religion, politics, 
or morality. 

There is nothing so strongly inculcated in monarchies, by 
the laws, by religion and honor, as submission to the prince's 
will ; but this very honor tells us that the prince never ought 
to command a dishonorable action, because this would render 
us incapable of serving him. 

Crillon refused to assassinate the Duke of Guise, but offered 
to fight him. After the massacre of St. Bartholomew, Charles 
IX, having sent orders to the governors in the several provinces 
for the Huguenots to be murdered, Viscount Dorte, who com- 
manded at Bayonne, wrote thus to the king:o " Sire, among 
the inhabitants of this town, and your majesty's troops, I could 
not find so much as one executioner ; they are honest citizens 
and brave soldiers. We jointly, therefore, beseech your majesty 
to command our arms and lives in things that are practicable." 
This great and generous soul looked upon a base action as a 
thing impossible. 

a See D'Aubigny's " History." 



32 MONTESQUIEU 

There is nothing that honor more strongly recommends to 
the nobility than to serve their prince in a military capacity. 
And, indeed, this is their favorite profession, because its 
dangers, its success, and even its miscarriages are the road to 
grandeur. Yet this very law of its own making honor chooses 
to explain: and in case of any affront, it requires or permits 
us to retire. 

It insists also that we should be at liberty either to seek or to 
reject employments, a liberty which it prefers even to an ample 
fortune. 

Honor, therefore, has its supreme laws, to which education 
is obliged to conform.^ The chief of these are, that we are per- 
mitted to set a value upon our fortune, but are absolutely for- 
bidden to set any upon our lives. 

The second is, that when we are raised to a post or prefer- 
ment, we should never do or permit anything which may seem 
to imply that we look upon ourselves as inferior to the rank we 
hold. 

The third is, that those things which honor forbids are more 
rigorously forbidden, when the laws do not concur in the pro- 
hibition ; and those it commands are more strongly insisted 
upon, when they happen not to be commanded by law. 

3. — Of Education in a Despotic Government 

As education in monarchies tends to raise and ennoble the 
mind, in despotic governments its only aim is to debase it. 
Here it must necessarily be servile ; even in power such an edu- 
cation will be an advantage, because every tyrant is at the same 
time a slave. 

Excessive obedience supposes ignorance in the person that 
obeys :c the same it supposes in him that commands, for he has 
no occasion to deliberate, to doubt, to reason ; he has only to 
will. 

In despotic states, each house is a separate government. As 
education, therefore, consists chiefly in social converse, it must 
be here very much limited ; all it does is to strike the heart with 

b We mention here what actually is, &lt;^.By_ excessive obedience, Montes- 

and not what ought to be; honor is a quieu intends blind obedience. — De Du- 
prejudice, which religion sometimes en- pin. 
deavors to remove, and at other times to 
regulate. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 33 

fear, and to imprint on the understanding a very simple notion 
of a few principles of religion. Learning here proves danger- 
ous, emulation fatal ; and as to virtue, Aristotle^ cannot think 
that there is any one virtue belonging to slaves ',e if so, educa- 
tion in despotic countries is confined within a very narrow com- 
pass. 

Here, therefore, education is in some measure needless: to 
give something, one must take away every thing, and begin 
with making a bad subject in order to make a good slave. 

For why should education take pains in forming a good citi- 
zen, only to make him share in the public misery ? If he loves 
his country, he will strive to relax the springs of government ; 
if he miscarries he will be undone ; if he succeeds, he must ex- 
pose himself, the prince, and his country to ruin. 

4. — Difference betiveen the Effects of Ancient and Modern 

Education 

Most of the ancients lived under governments that had vir- 
tue for their principle ; and when this was in full vigor they 
performed actions unusual in our times, and at which our nar- 
row minds are astonished. 

Another advantage their education possessed over ours was 
that it never could be effaced by contrary impressions. Epam- 
inondas, the last year of his life, said, heard, beheld, and per- 
formed the very same things as at the age in which he received 
the first principles of his education. 

In our days we receive three different or contrary educa- 
tions, namely, of our parents, of our masters, and of the world. 
What we learn in the latter effaces all the ideas of the former. 
This, in some measure, arises from the contrast we experience 
between our religious and worldly engagements,/" a thing un- 
known to the ancients. 

d " Polit." lib. T. not made of Europe a world of pol- 

e How can this be, asks one, when troons. It is well known that officers 

slaves have no will? — Ed. most attached to tlie laws of this relis:ion 

fThe Christian religion forbids ven- are commonly the most exact in fulfill- 

geance and prescribes humility; this is ing the duties of their state, and the 

perhaps the point of contrast which the most intrepid in danger.— D. 

author notes. But these precepts have 



Vol. I.— 3 



34 MONTESQUIEU 

5. — Of Education in a Republican Government 

It is in a republican government that the whole power of 
education is required. The fear of despotic governments 
naturally arises of itself amidst threats and punishments ; the 
honor of monarchies is favored by the passions, and favors them 
in its turn; but virtue is a self-renunciation,g which is ever 
arduous and painful. 

This virtue may be defined as the love of the laws and of our 
country. As such love requires a constant preference of public 
to private interest, it is the source of all private virtues ; for 
they are nothing more than this very preference itself. 

This love is peculiar to democracies. In these alone the 
government is intrusted to private citizens. Now, a govern- 
ment is like every thing else: to preserve it we must love it. 

Has it ever been known that kings were not fond of mon- 
archy, or that despotic princes hated arbitrary power? 

Every thing, therefore, depends on establishing this love in a 
republic ; and to inspire it ought to be the principal business of 
education : but the surest way of instilling it into children is 
for parents to set them an example. 

People have it generally in their power to communicate their 
ideas to their children ; but they are still better able to trans- 
fuse their passions. 

If it happens otherwise, it is because the impressions made 
at home are effaced by those they have received abroad. 

It is not the young people that degenerate ; they are not 
spoiled till those of maturer age are already sunk into corrup- 
tion. 

6. — Of some Institutions among the Greeks 

The ancient Greeks, convinced of the necessity that people 
who live under a popular government should be trained up to 
virtue, made very singular institutions in order to inspire it. 
Upon seeing in the life of Lycurgus the laws that legislator 
gave to the Lacedaemonians, I imagine I am reading the his- 

g This virtue, which Montesquieu de- citizen often finds his own peace of mind 

fines as " love of country," is not self- and independence, the peaceable pos- 

renunciation; far from urging man to session and enjoyment of his property, 

abnegation of his interests, it permits the hope of increasing it by liberty 01 

him to see the state flourishing and commerce, and of being raised tr&gt; posts 

tranquil. In this public prosperity the of dignity. — D. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 35 

tory of the Sevarambes7» The laws of Crete were the model of 
those of Sparta ; and those of Plato reformed them. 

Let us reflect here a little on the extensive genius with which 
those legislators must have been endowed, to perceive that by 
striking at received customs, and by confounding all manner 
of virtues,^ they should display their wisdom to the universe. 
Lycurgus, by blending theft with the spirit of justice, the hard- 
est servitude with excess of liberty, the most rigid sentiments 
with the greatest moderation, gave stability to his city. He 
seemed to deprive her of all resources, such as arts, commerce, 
money, and walls ; ambition prevailed among the citizens with- 
out hopes of improving their fortune ; they had natural senti- 
ments without the tie of a son, husband, or father ; and chastity 
was stripped even of modesty and shame. This was the road 
that led Sparta to grandeur and glory ; and so infallible were 
these institutions, that it signified nothing to gain a victory 
over that republic without subverting her polity./ 

By these laws Crete and Laconia were governed. Sparta 
was the last that fell a prey to the Macedonians, and Crete to 
the Romans.^ The Sammtes had the same institutions, which 
furnished those very Romans with the subject of four-and- 
twenty triumphs.^ 

A character so extraordinary m the institutions of Greece 
has shown itself lately in the dregs and corruptions of modern 
times.'" A very honest legislator has formed a people to whom 
probity seems as natural as bravery to the Spartans. Mr. Penn 
is a real Lycurgus : and though the former made peace his 
principal aim, as the latter did war, yet they resemble one an- 
other in the singular way of living to which they reduced their 
people, in the ascendant they had over free men, in the preju- 
dices they overcame, and In the passions which they subdued. 

Another example we have from Paraguay. This has been 
the subject of an invidious charge against a society that con- 
siders the pleasure of commanding as the only happiness in life : 

h See Vairasse d'Allais in his " Voy- nanimity.— Plutarch, " Life of the Philo- 

agcs ImaRinaires," vol. v.— Kd. ixtmen." See Livy, hook XXXVTIT. 

t The author intends that the Laccdac- k She defended her laws and liberty 

monians confounded their virtues and for the space of three years. See the 

vices. — D. oSth, qoth, and looth books of Livy, in 

y Philopoemen obliged the Laced,-c- t'lorus's epitome. She made a braver 

monians to chanpe their manner of edu- resistance than the Rreatest_ kings. 

catinR their children, beinp; convinced / Florus lib. I., cap. xvi. 

that if he did not take this measure they m In " Isece Romuh." — Cicero, 
would always be noted for their mag- 



36 MONTESQUIEU 

but it will be ever a glorious undertaking to render a govern- 
ment subservient to human happiness.^ 

It is glorious indeed for this society to have been the first in 
pointing out to those countries the idea of religion joined with 
that of humanity. By repairing the devastations of the Span- 
iards, she has begun to heal one of the most dangerous wounds 
that the human species ever received. 

An exquisite sensibility to whatever she distinguishes by 
the name of honor, joined to her zeal for a religion which is far 
more humbling in respect to those who receive than to those 
who preach its doctrines, has set her upon vast undertakings, 
which she has accomplished with success. She has drawn wild 
people from their woods, secured them a maintenance, and 
clothed their nakedness ; and had she only by this step im- 
proved the industry of mankind, it would have been sufficient 
to eternize her fame. 

They who shall attempt hereafter to introduce like institu- 
tions must establish the community of goods as prescribed in 
Plato's republic ; that high respect he required for the gods ; 
that separation from strangers, for the preservation of morals ; 
and an extensive commerce carried on by the community, and 
not by private citizens : they must give our arts without our 
luxury, and our wants without our desires. 

They must proscribe money, the effects of which are to swell 
people's fortunes beyond the bounds prescribed by nature ; to 
learn to preserve for no purpose what has been idly hoarded 
up ; to multiply without end our desires ; and to supply the 
sterility of nature, from whom we have received very scanty 
means of inflaming our passions, and of corrupting each other. 

" The Epidamnians,o perceiving their morals depraved by 
conversing with barbarians, chose a magistrate for making all 
contracts and sales in the name and behalf of the city." Com- 
merce then does not corrupt the constitution, and the constitu- 
tion does not deprive society of the advantages of commerce./* 

n The Indians of Paraguay do not de- ans were the inhabitants of Dyrrachium, 

pend on any particular lord; they pay now Durazzo. — Ed. 

only a fifth of the taxes, and are allowed p But it does away with competition, 

the use of firearms to defend themselves. and thus ruins commerce. — Anon. Ed. 

o Plutarch in his " Questions concern- 1764. 
ing the Greek affairs. The Epidamni* 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 37 

7. — In what Cases these singular Institutions may be of Service 

Institutions of this kind may be proper in republics, because 
they have virtue for their principle ; but to excite men to honor 
in monarchies, or to inspire fear in despotic governments, less 
trouble is necessary. 

Besides, they can take place but in a small state,? in which 
there is a possibility of general education, and of training up 
the body of the people like a single family. 

The laws of Minos, of Lycurgus, and of Plato suppose a par- 
ticular attention and care, which the citizens ought to have over 
one another's conduct. But an attention of this kind cannot 
be expected in the confusion and multitude of affairs in which a 
large nation is entangled. 

In institutions of this kind, money, as we have above ob- 
served, must be banished. But in great societies, the multi- 
plicity, variety, embarrassment, and importance of affairs, as 
well as the facility of purchasing, and the slowness of exchange, 
require a common measure. In order to support or extend 
our power, we must be possessed of the means to which, by 
the unanimous consent of mankind, this power is annexed. 

8. — Explanation of a Paradox of the Ancients in respect to 

Manners 

That judicious writer, Polybius, informs us*" that music was 
necessary to soften the manners of the Arcadians, who lived 
in a cold, gloomy country ; that the inhabitants of Cynete, who 
slighted music, were the cruellest of all the Greeks, and that 
no other town was so immersed in luxury and debauchery. 
Plato-s is not afraid to affirm that there is no possibility of mak- 
ing a change in music without altering the frame of govern- 
ment. Aristotle, who seems to have written his " Politics " only 
in order to contradict Plato, agrees with him, notwithstanding, 
in regard to the power and influence of music over the manners 
of the people.* This was also the opinion of Thcophrastus, of 
Plutarch," and of all the ancients — an opinion grounded on 
mature reflection ; being one of the principles of their polity .** 

q Such as were formerly the cities of t Lib. VIII. cap. v. 

Greece. " " Life of Pclopidas." 

r " Ilist." iv. 20 and 21. v IMato, in his fourth book of laws, 

s " De Repub." lib. IV. says that the prefectures of music and 



38 



MONTESQUIEU 



Thus it was they enacted laws, and thus they required that cities 
should be governed. 

This I fancy must be explained in the following manner. It 
is observable that in the cities of Greece, especially those whose 
principal object was war, all lucrative arts and professions were 
considered unworthy of a freeman. " Most arts," says Xeno- 
phon,w " corrupt and enervate the bodies of those that exer- 
cise them ; they oblige them to sit in the shade, or near the 
fire. They can find no leisure, either for their friends or for 
the republic." It was only by the corruption of some democra- 
cies that artisans became freemen. This we learn from Aris- 
totle,-*" who maintains that a well-regulated republic will never 
give them the right and freedom of the city .3* 

Agriculture was likewise a servile profession, and generally 
practised by the inhabitants of conquered countries, such as 
the Helotes among the Lacedaemonians, the Periecians among 
the Cretans, the Penestes among the Thessalians, and other 
conquered- people in other republics. 

In fine, every kind of low commerce^ was infamous among 
the Greeks ; as it obliged a citizen to serve and wait on a slave, 
on a lodger, or a stranger. This was a notion that clashed 
with the spirit of Greek liberty ; hence Plato&amp; in his laws orders 
a citizen to be punished if he attempts to concern himself with 
trade. 

Thus in the Greek republics the magistrates were extremely 
embarrassed. They would not have the citizens apply them- 
selves to trade, to agriculture, or to the arts, and yet they would 
not have them idle.c They found, therefore, employment for 
them in gymnic and military exercises ; and none else were 
allowed by their institution. c? Hence the Greeks must be con- 



gymnic exercises are the most impor- 
tant employments in the city; and, in 
his " Republic," book III., Damon will 
tell you, says he, what sounds are capa- 
ble of corrupting the mind with base 
sentiments, or of inspiring the contrary 
virtues. 

•w Book sth of " Memorable Sayings." 

X " Polit." book III. chap. iv. 

31 Diophantes, says Aristotle, " Polit." 
chap, vii., made a law formerly at 
Athens, that artisans should be slaves 
to the republic. 

2 Plato, likewise, and Aristotle require 
slaves to till the land. (" Laws," book 
v., " Polit." book VII., chap, x.) True 
it is that agriculture was not everywhere 



exercised by slaves: on the contrary, 
Aristotle observes the best republics 
were those in which the citizens them- 
selves tilled the land: but this was 
brought about by the corruption of the 
ancient governments, which had become 
democratic: for in earlier times the 
cities of Greece were subject to an aris- 
tocratic government. 

a Cauponatio. 

b Book XI. 

c Arist. " Polit." lib. X. 

d " Ars corporum exercendorum gym- 
nastica. variis certaminibus terendo- 
rum pcedotribica." — Arist. " Polit." lib. 
VIII. cap. iii. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 39 

sidered as a society of wrestlers and boxers. Now, these exer- 
cises having a natural tendency to render people hardy and 
fierce, there was a necessity for tempering them with others 
that might soften their manners.^ For this purpose, music, 
which influences the mind by means of the corporeal organs, 
was extremely proper. It is a kind of medium between manly 
exercises, which harden the body, and speculative sciences, 
which are apt to render us unsociable and sour. It cannot be 
said that music inspired virtue, for this would be inconceivable : 
but it prevented the efifects of a savage institution, and enabled 
the soul to have such a share in the education as it could never 
have had without the assistance of harmony. 

Let us suppose among ourselves a society of men so pas- 
sionately fond of hunting as to make it their sole employment ; 
they would doubtless contract thereby a kind of rusticity and 
fierceness. But if they happen to imbibe a taste for music, we 
should quickly perceive a sensible difference in their customs 
and manners. In short, the exercises used by the Greeks could 
raise but one kind of passions, viz., fierceness, indignation, and 
cruelty. But music excites all these ; and is likewise able to 
inspire the soul with a sense of pity, lenity, tenderness, and love. 
Our moral writers, who declaim so vehemently against the 
stage, sufficiently demonstrate the power of music over the 
mind. 

If the society above mentioned were to have no other music 
than that of drums, and the sound of the trumpet, would it not 
be more difficult to accomplish this end than by the more melt- 
ing tones of softer harmony ? The ancients were, therefore, in 
the right when, under particular circumstances, they preferred 
one mode to another in regard to manners. 

But some will ask, why should music be pitched upon as 
preferable to any other entertainment? It is because of all sen- 
sible pleasures there is none that less corrupts the soul. We 
blush to read in Plutarch/" that the Thebans, in order to soften 
the manners of their youth, authorized by law a passion which 
ought to be proscribed by all nations. 

e Aristotle observes that the children rudeness of behavior. — " Polit." lib. 

of the Laccdwmonians, who began these VIII. cap. iv. 

exercises at a very tender age, con- / " Life of Pelopidas." 
tracted thence too great a ferocity and 



BOOK V 

THAT THE LAWS GIVEN BY THE LEGISLATOR 
OUGHT TO BE IN RELATION TO THE PRIN- 
CIPLE OF GOVERNMENT 

I. — Idea of this Book 

THAT the laws of education should relate to the principle 
of each government has been shown in the preceding 
book. Now the same may be said of those which the 
legislator gives to the whole society. The relation of laws to 
this principle strengthens the several springs of government ; 
and this principle derives thence, in its turn, a new degree of 
vigor. And thus it is in mechanics, that action is always fol- 
lowed by reaction. 

Our design is, to examine this relation in each government, 
beginning with the republican state, the principle of which is 
virtue. 

2. — What is meant by Virtue in a political State 

Virtue in a republic is a most simple thing ; it is a love of 
the repubUc; it is a sensation, and not a consequence of ac- 
quired knowledge, a sensation that may be felt by the meanest 
as well as by the highest person in the state. When the com- 
mon people adopt good maxims, they adhere to them more 
steadily than those whom we call gentlemen. It is very rarely 
that corruption commences with the former : nay, they fre- 
quently derive from their imperfect light a stronger attach- 
ment to the established laws and customs. 

The love of our country is conducive to a purity of morals, 
and the latter is again conducive to the former. The less we 
are able to satisfy our private passions, the more we abandon 
ourselves to those of a general nature. How comes it that 
monks are so fond of their order? It is owing to the very 

40 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 41 

cause that renders the order insupportable. Their rule debars 
them from all those things by which the ordinary passions are 
fed ; there remains therefore only this passion for the very rule 
that torments them. The more austere it is, that is, the more it 
curbs their inclinations, the more force it gives to the only pas- 
sion left them. 

3. — What is meant by a Love of the Republic in a Democracy 

A love of the republic in a democracy is a love of the democ- 
racy ; as the latter is that of equality. 

A love of the democracy is likewise that of frugality. Since 
every individual ought here to enjoy the same happiness and 
the same advantages, they should consequently taste the same 
pleasures and form the same hopes, which cannot be expected 
but from a general frugality. 

The love of equality in a democracy limits ambition to the 
sole desire, to the sole happiness, of doing greater services to 
our country than the rest of our fellow-citizens. They cannot 
all render her equal services, but they all ought to serve her 
with equal alacrity. At our coming into the world, we con- 
tract an immense debt to our country, which we can never dis- 
charge. 

Hence distinctions here arise from the principle of equality, 
even when it seems to be removed by signal services or superior 
abilities. 

The love of frugality limits the desire of having to the study 
of procuring necessaries to our family, and superfluities to our 
country. Riches give a power which a citizen cannot use for 
himself, for then he would be no longer equal. They likewise 
procure pleasures which he ought not to enjoy, because these 
would be also repugnant to the equality. 

Thus well-regulated democracies, by establishing domestic 
frugality, made way at the same time for public expenses, as 
was the case at Rome and Athens, when magnificence and pro- 
fusion arose from the very fund of frugality. And as religion 
commands us to have pure and unspotted hands when we make 
our offerings to the gods, the laws required a frugality of life 
to enable them to be liberal to our country. 

The good sense and happiness of individuals depend greatly 
upon the mediocrity of tlieir abilities and fortunes. Therefore, 



42 MONTESQUIEU 

as a republic, where the laws have placed many in a middling 
station, is composed of wise men, it will be wisely governed ; 
as it is composed of happy men, it will be extremely happy. 

4. — In what Manner the Love of Equality and Frugality is 

inspired 

The love of equality and of a frugal economy is greatly ex- 
cited by equality and frugality themselves, in societies where 
both these virtues are established by law. 

In monarchies and despotic governments, nobody aims at 
equality ; this does not so much as enter their thoughts ; they 
all aspire to superiority. People of the very lowest condition 
desire to emerge from their obscurity, only to lord it over their 
fellow-subjects. 

It is the same with respect to frugality. To love it, we must 
practise and enjoy it. It is not those who are enervated by 
pleasure that are fond of a frugal life ; were this natural and 
common, Alcibiades would never have been the admiration of 
the universe.o Neither is it those who envy or admire the lux- 
ury of the great ; people that have present to their view none 
but rich men, or men miserable like themselves, detest their 
wretched condition, without loving or knowing the real term 
or point of misery. 

A true maxim it is, therefore, that in order to love equality 
and frugality in a republic, these virtues must have been previ- 
ously established by law. 

5. — hi zvhat Manner the Lazvs establish Equality in a 

Democracy 

Some ancient legislators, as Lycurgus and Romulus, made 
an equal division of lands. A settlement of this kind can never 
take place except upon the foundation of a new republic ; or 
when the old one is so corrupt, and the minds of the people are 
so disposed, that the poor think themselves obliged to demand, 
and the rich obliged to consent to, a remedy of this nature. 

If the legislator, in making a division of this kind, does not 
enact laws at the same time to support it, he forms only a 

a Voltaire takes exception to this vail, since his standard of admiration is 
adulation of Alcibiades, and holds that filled by such men as Cato and Marcus 
Plutarch and Montesquieu do not pre- Aurelius. — Ed. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 43 

temporary constitution ; inequality will break in where the laws 
have not precluded it, and the republic will be utterly undone. 

Hence for the preservation of this equality it is absolutely 
necessary there should be some regulation in respect to wom- 
en's dowries donations, successions, testamentary settlements, 
and all other forms of contracting. For were we once allowed 
to dispose of our property to whom and how we pleased, the 
will of each individual would disturb the order of the funda- 
mental law. 

Solon, by permitting the Athenians, upon failure of issue,&amp; 
to leave their estates to whom they pleased, acted contrary to 
the ancient laws, by which the estates were ordered to 
continue in the family of the testator ;c and even contrary to 
his own laws, for by abolishing debts he had aimed at equality. 

The law which prohibited people having two inheritances^ 
was extremely well adapted for a democracy. It derived its 
origin from the equal distribution of lands and portions made 
to each citizen. The law would not permit a single man to 
possess more than a single portion. 

From the same source arose those laws by which the next 
relative was ordered to marry the heiress. This law was given 
to the Jews after the like distribution. Plato,? who grounds his 
laws on this division, made the same regulation which had been 
received as a law by the Athenians. 

At Athens there was a law whose spirit, in my opinion, has 
not been hitherto rightly understood. It was lawful to marry 
a sister only by the father's side, but it was not permitted to 
espouse a sister by the same venter./^ This custom was orig- 
inally owing to republics, whose spirit w^ould not permit that 
two portions of land, and consequently two inheritances, should 
devolve on the same person. A man who married his sister 
only by the father's side could inherit but one estate, namely, 
that of his father ; but by espousing his sister by the same ven- 
ter, it might happen that this sister's father, having no male 

6 Plutarch, " Life of Solon." custom bepran in the earliest times. 

c Ibid. Thus Abraham says of Sarah, "She is my 

d Philolaus of Corinth made a law at sister, my father's daughter, but not my 

Athens that the number of the portions mother's." The same reasons occasioned 

of land and that of inheritances should the establishing the same law among dif- 

be always the same.— Arist. " Polit.," fercnt nations. 

lib. TT. cap. xii.* 

e" Republic," book VTIT. "Philolaus was legislator at Corinth, 

/ Cornelius Nepos, in prxfat. This and not at Athens.— lid. 



44 MONTESQUIEU 

issue, might leave her his estate, and consequently the brother 
who married her might be possessed of two. 

Little will it avail to object to what Philo says,? that although 
the Athenians were allowed to marry a sister by the father's 
side, and not by the mother's, yet the contrary practice pre- 
vailed among the Lacedemonians, who were permitted to 
espouse a sister by the mother's side, and not by the father's. 
For I find in Strabo/^ that at Sparta, whenever a woman was 
married to her brother she had half his portion for her dowry. 
Plain is it that this second law was made in order to prevent 
the bad consequences of the former. That the estate belong- 
ing to the sister's family might not devolve on the brother's, 
they gave half the brother's estate to the sister for her dowry. 

Seneca,^ speaking of Silanus, who had married his sister,/ 
says that the permission was limited at Athens, but general at 
Alexandria. In a monarchical government there was very little 
concern about any such thing as a division of estates. 

Excellent was that law which, in order to maintain this divi- 
sion of lands in a democracy, ordained that a father who had 
several children should pitch upon one of them to inherit his 
portion,^ and leave the others to be adopted, to the end that the 
numbers of citizens might always be kept upon an equality 
with that of the divisions. 

Phaleas of Chalcedon^ contrived a very extraordinary method 
of rendering all fortunes equal, in a republic where there was 
the greatest inequality. This was, that the rich should give 
fortunes with their daughters to the poor, but receive none 
themselves ; and that the poor should receive money for their 
daughters, instead of giving them fortunes. But I do not re- 
member that a regulation of this kind ever took place in any 
republic. It lays the citizens under such hard and oppressive 
conditions as would make them detest the very equality which 
they designed to establish. It is proper sometimes that the laws 
should not seem to tend so directly to the end they propose. 

Though real equality be the very soul of a democracy, it is 

g De specialibus legibus quae pertinent though not without indiscretion." — Cre- 

ad praeceptor Decalogi. vier. 

It Lib. X.t k Plato has a law of this kind, lib. XI. 

t Athenis dimidium licet, Alexandria " Leg." 

totum.— Seneca, " de morte Claudii." / Aristot. lib. II. cap. vii. 

;' Montesquieu is here accused of an 

attempt at satire, since it is Tacitus who t Strabo speaks in this connection of 

says, " Silanus lived in great friendship the laws of Crete, and not of those oi 

with his sister, though not criminally, al- the Lacedsemonians. — Barthelemy. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 45 

so difficult to establish, that an extreme exactness in this re- 
spect would not be always convenient. Sufficient is it to es- 
tablish a census,»« which shall reduce or fix the differences to a 
certain point : it is afterwards the business of particular laws to 
level, as it were, the inequalities, by the duties laid upon the 
rich, and by the ease afforded to the poor. It is moderate 
riches alone that can give or suffer this sort of compensation ; 
for as to men of overgrown estates, everything which does not 
contribute to advance their power and honor is considered by 
them as an injury. 

All inequality in democracies ought to be derived from the 
nature of the government, and even from the principle of equal- 
ity.' For example, it may be apprehended that people who are 
obliged to live by their labor would be too much impoverished 
by a public employment, or neglect the duties attending it ; 
that artisans would grow insolent, and that too great a num- 
ber of freemen would overpower the ancient citizens. In this 
case the equality" in a democracy may be suppressed for the 
good of the state. But this is only an apparent equality ; for a 
man ruined by a public employment would be in a worse con- 
dition than his fellow-citizens ; and this same man, being 
obliged to neglect his duty, would reduce the rest to a worse 
condition than himself, and so on. 



6. — In what Manner the Lazvs ought to maintain Frugality m a 

Democracy 

It is not sufficient in a well-regulated democracy that the 
divisions of land be equal ; they ought also to be small, as was 
customary among the Romans. " God forbid," said Curius to 
his soldiers,o " that a citizen should look upon that as a small 
piece of land which is sufficient to maintain him." 

As equality of fortunes supports frugality, so the latter main- 
tains the former. These things, though in themselves different, 
are of such a nature as to be unable to subsist separately ; they 

m Solon made four classes: the first, ii Solon excludes from public employ- 

of those who had an income of 500 minas mcnts all those of the fourth class, 

either in corn or liquid fruits; the sec- o They insisted upon a larger division 

ond, of those who had 300, and were of the conquered lands. — Plutarch's 

able to keep a horse; the third, of such "Xloral Works, Lives of the ancient 

as had only 200; the fourth, of all those Kings and Commanders." 
who lived by their manual labor. — Plut., 
" Lifs oi Solon." 



46 MONTESQUIEU 

reciprocally act upon each other ; if one withdraws itself from a 
democracy, the other surely follows it. 

True is it that when a democracy is founded on commerce, 
private people may acquire vast riches without a corruption of 
morals. This is because the spirit of commerce is naturally at- 
tended with that of frugality, economy, moderation, labor, 
prudence, tranquillity, order, and rule. So long as this spirit 
subsists, the riches it produces have no bad effect. The mis- 
chief is, when excessive wealth destroys the spirit of commerce, 
then it is that the inconveniences of inequality begin to be felt. 

In order to support this spirit, commerce should be carried 
on by the principal citizens ; this should be their sole aim and 
study ; this the chief object of the laws : and these very laws, 
by dividing the estates of individuals in proportion to the in- 
crease of commerce, should set every poor citizen so far at his 
ease as to be able to work like the rest, and every wealthy citi- 
zen in such a mediocrity as to be obliged to take some pains 
either in preserving or acquiring a fortune. 

It is an excellent law in a trading republic to make an equal 
division of the paternal estate among the children. The conse- 
quence of this is, that how great soever a fortune the father has 
made, his children, being not so rich as he, are induced to 
avoid luxury, and to work as he has done. I speak here only 
of trading republics ; as to those that have no commerce, the 
legislator must pursue quite different measures./' 

In Greece there were two sorts of republics : the one military, 
like Sparta ; the other commercial, as Athens. In the former, 
the citizens were obliged to be idle ; in the latter, endeavors 
were used to inspire them with the love of industry and labor. 
Solon made idleness a crime, and insisted that each citizen 
should give an account of his manner of getting a livelihood. 
And, indeed, in a well-regulated democracy, where people's 
expenses should extend only to what is necessary, every one 
ought to have it ; for how should their wants be otherwise sup- 
plied ? 

p In these, the portions or fortunes of women ought to be very much limited. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 47 

7. — Other Methods of favoring the Principle of Democracy 

An equal division of lands cannot be established in all democ- 
racies. There are some circumstances in which a regulation 
of this nature would be impracticable, dangerous, and even sub- 
versive of the constitution. We are not always obliged to pro- 
ceed to extremes. If it appears that this division of lands, which 
was designed to preserve the people's morals, does not suit the 
democracy, recourse must be had to other methods. 

If a permanent body be established to serve as a rule and pat- 
tern of manners ; a senate, to which years, virtue, gravity, and 
eminent services procure admittance ; the senators, by being 
exposed to public view like the statues of the gods, must natu- 
rally inspire every family with sentiments of virtue. 

Above all, this senate must steadily adhere to the ancient 
institutions, and mind that the people and the magistrates never 
swerve from them. 

The preservation of the ancient customs is a very consider- 
able point in respect to manners. Since a corrupt people sel- 
dom perform any memorable actions, seldom establish socie- 
ties, build cities, or enact laws ; on the contrary, since most in- 
stitutions are derived from people whose manners are plain and 
simple, to keep up the ancient customs is the way to preserve 
the original purity of morals. 

Besides, if by some revolution the state has happened to as- 
sume a new form, this seldom can be effected without infinite 
pains and labor, and hardly ever by idle and debauched per- 
sons. Even those who had been the instruments of the revolu- 
tion were desirous it should be relished, which is difftcult to 
compass without good laws. Hence it is that ancient institu- 
tions generally tend to reform the people's manners, and those 
of modern date to corrupt them. In the course of a long ad- 
ministration, the descent to vice is insensible ; but there is no 
reascending to virtue without making the most generous 
efforts. 

It has been questioned whether the members of the senate 
we are speaking of ought to be for life or only chosen for a 
time. Doubtless they ought to be for life, as was the custom at 
Rome.g at Sparta,** and even at Athens. For we must not con- 

q The maRistrates there were annual, r Lvcurpus, says Xenophon, " dc Re- 

and the senators for life. pub. Lacedaem.," ordained that the sena- 



48 MONTESQUIEU 

found the senate at Athens, which was a body that changed 
every three months, with the Areopagus, whose members, as 
standing patterns, were estabHshed for Hfe. 

Let this be, therefore, a general maxim ; that in a senate de- 
signed to be a rule, and the depository, as it were, of manners, 
the members ought to be chosen for life : in a senate intended 
for the administration of affairs, the members may be changed. 

The spirit, said Aristotle, waxes old as well as the body. 
This reflection holds good only in regard to a single magistrate, 
but cannot be applied to a senatorial assembly. 

At Athens, besides the Areopagus, there were guardians of 
the public morals, as well as of the laws.-J At Sparta, all the old 
men were censors. At Rome, the censorship was committed 
to two particular magistrates. As the senate watched over the 
people, the censors were to have an eye over the people and 
the senate. Their ofifice was, to reform the corruptions of the 
republic, to stigmatize indolence, to censure neglects, and to 
correct mistakes ; as to flagrant crimes, these were left to the 
punishment of the laws. 

That Roman law which required the accusations in cases 
of adultery to be public was admirably well calculated for pre- 
serving the purity of morals; it intimidated married women, 
as well as those who were to watch over their conduct. 

Nothing contributes more to the preservation of morals than 
an extreme subordination of the young to the old. Thus they 
are both restrained, the former by their respect for those of 
advanced age, and the latter by their regard for themselves. 

Nothing gives a greater force to the laws than a perfect sub- 
ordination between the citizens and the magistrate. " The 
great difference which Lycurgus established between Sparta 
and the other cities," says Xenophon,^ " consists chiefly in the 
obedience the citizens show to their laws ; they run when the 
magistrate calls them. But at Athens a rich man would be 
highly displeased to be thought dependent on the magistrate." 

Paternal authority is likewise of great use towards the 
preservation of morals. We have already observed, that in a 
republic there is not so coercive a force as in other govern- 

tors should be chosen from amongst the age of the former more honorable than 
old men, to the end that they might not the strength and vigor of the latter. 
be neglected in the decline of life; thus, j Even the Areopagus itself was sub- 
by making them judges of the courage ject to their censure. 
of young people, he rendered the old t " Republic of the Lacedaemonians." 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 49 

ments. The laws must, therefore, endeavor to supply this de- 
fect by some means or other; and this is done by paternal 
authority. 

Fathers at Rome had the power of life and death over their 
children." At Sparta, every father had a right to correct an- 
other man's child. 

Paternal authority ended at Rome together with the republic. 
In monarchies, where such a purity of morals is not required, 
they are controlled by no other authority than that of the mag- 
istrates. 

The Roman laws, which accustomed young people to de- 
pendence, established a long minority. Perhaps we are mis- 
taken in conforming to this custom ; there is no necessity for 
so much constraint in monarchies. 

This very subordination in a republic might make it neces- 
sary for the father to continue in the possession of his children's 
fortune during life, as was the custom at Rome. But this is not 
agreeable to the spirit of monarchy. 

8. — In what Manner the Laws should relate to the Principle 
of Government in an Aristocracy 

If the people are virtuous in an aristocracy, they enjoy very 
nearly the same happiness as in a popvdar government, and 
the state grows powerful. But as a great share of virtue is very 
rare where men's fortunes are so unequal, the laws must tend 
as much as possible to infuse a spirit of moderation, and en- 
deavor to re-establish that equality which was necessarily re- 
moved by the constitution. 

The spirit of moderation is what we call virtue in an aristoc- 
racy ; it supplies the place of the spirit of equality in a popular 
state. 

As the pomp and splendor with which kings are surrounded 
form a part of their power, so modesty and simplicity of man- 
ners constitute the strength of an aristocratic nobility.'^^ When 

« We may see in the Roman FTistory very wise government, decided a dis- 

how useful this power was to the re- pute between a nohle Venetian and a 

public. I shall give an instance, even in gentleman of Terra Firma in respect to 

the time of its greatest corruption. Aulus precedency in a church, by declaring 

Fulvius was set out on his journey in that out of Venice a noble Venetian 

order to join Catiline; his father called had no pre-eminence over any other 

him back, and put him to death. — Sal- citizen, 

lust. " de bello Catil."* 

V In our days the Venetians, who in * The instance is by no means isolated, 

many respects may be said to have a See Dion. lib. XXXVlI. 36.— Ed. 

Vol. I.— 4 



50 MONTESQUIEU 

they affect no distinction, when they mix with the people, dress 
like them, and with them share all their pleasures, the people 
are apt to forget their subjection and weakness. 

Every government has its nature and principle. An aris- 
tocracy must not therefore assume the nature and principle of 
monarchy ; which would be the case were the nobles to be in- 
vested with personal privileges distinct from those of their 
body ; privileges ought to be for the senate, and simple respect 
for the senators. 

In aristocratic governments there are two principal sources 
of disorder: excessive inequality between the governors and 
the governed ; and the same inequality between the different 
members of the body that governs. From these two inequali- 
ties, hatreds and jealousies arise, which the laws ought ever to 
prevent or repress. 

The first inequality is chiefly when the privileges of the no- 
bility are honorable only as they are ignominious to the people. 
Such was the law at Rome by which the patricians were forbid- 
den to marry plebeians ;w a law that had no other effect than to 
render the patricians on the one side more haughty, and on the 
other more odious. The reader may see what advantages the 
tribunes derived thence in their harangues. 

This inequality occurs likewise when the condition of the 
citizens differs with regard to taxes, which may happen in four 
different ways : when the nobles assume the privilege of pay- 
ing none ; when they commit frauds to exempt themselves ;•«■ 
when they engross the public money, under pretence of re- 
wards or appointments for their respective employments ; in 
fine, when they render the common people tributary, and di- 
vide among their own body the profits arising from the several 
subsidies. This last case is very rare ; an aristocracy so insti- 
tuted would be the most intolerable of all governments. 

While Rome inclined towards aristocracy, she avoided all 
these inconveniences. The magistrates never received any 
emoluments from their office. The chief men of the republic 
were taxed like the rest, nay, more heavily ; and sometimes 
the taxes fell upon them alone. In fine, far from sharing 
among themselves the revenues of the state, all they could 

TV Tt was inserted by the decemvirs in x As in some aristocracies in our time; 

the two last tables. See Dionys. Hali- nothing is more prejudicial to the gov- 
carn., lib. X. ernment. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 51 

draw from the public treasure, and all the wealth that fortune 
flung into their laps, they bestowed freely on the people, to be 
excused from accepting public honors.^ 

It is a fundamental maxim that largesses are pernicious to 
the people in a democracy, but salutary in an aristocratic gov- 
ernment. The former make them forget they are citizens, the 
latter bring them to a sense of it. 

If the revenues of the state are not distributed among the 
people, they must be convinced at least of their being well ad- 
ministered : to feast their eyes with the public treasure is with 
them the same thing almost as enjoying it. The golden chain 
displayed at Venice, the riches exhibited at Rome in public tri- 
umphs, the treasures preserved in the temple of Saturn, were 
in reality the wealth of the people. 

It is a very essential point in an aristocracy that the nobles 
themselves should not levy the taxes. The first order of the 
state in Rome never concerned themselves with it ; the levying 
of the taxes was committed to the second, and even this in 
process of time was attended with great inconveniences. In an 
aristocracy of this kind, where the nobles levied the taxes, the 
private people would be all at the discretion of persons in public 
employments ; and there would be no such thing as a superior 
tribunal to check their power. The members appointed to re- 
move the abuses would rather enjoy them. The nobles would 
be like the princes of despotic governments, who confiscate 
whatever estates they please. 

Soon would the profits hence arising be considered as a 
patrimony, which avarice would enlarge at pleasure. The 
farms would be lowered, and the public revenues reduced to 
nothing. This is the reason that some governments, without 
having ever received any remarkable shock, have dwindled 
away to such a degree as not only their neighbors, but even 
their own subjects, have been surprised at it. 

The laws should likewise forbid the nobles all kinds of com- 
merce: merchants of such unbounded credit would monopo- 
lize all to themselves. Commerce is a profession of people who 
are upon an equality ; hence among despotic states the most 
miserable are those in which the prince applies himself to trade. 

y See in Strabo, lib. XIV., in what manner the Rbodlans behaved ?n this 
respect. 



52 



MONTESQUIEU 



The laws of Venice debara the nobles from commerce, by 
which they might even innocently acquire exorbitant wealth. 

The laws ought to employ the most efifectual means for mak- 
ing the nobles do justice to the people. If they have not es- 
tablished a tribune, they ought to be a tribune themselves. 

Every sort of asylum in opposition to the execution of the 
laws destroys aristocracy, and is soon succeeded by tyranny. 

They ought always to mortify the lust of dominion. There 
should be either a temporary or perpetual magistrate to keep 
the nobles in awe, as the Ephori at Sparta and the State Inquisi- 
tors at Venice — magistrates subject to no formalities. This 
sort of government stands in need of the strongest springs: 
thus a mouth of stoned is open to every informer at Venice — 
a mouth to which one would be apt to give the appellation of 
tyranny. 

These arbitrary magistrates in an aristocracy bear some 
analogy to the censorship in democracies,^ which of its own 
nature is equally independent. And, indeed, the censors ought 
to be subject to no inquiry in relation to their conduct during 
their office ; they should meet with a thorough confidence, and 
never be discouraged. In this respect the practice of the 
Romans deserved admiration ; magistrates of all denomina- 
tions were accountable for their administration,^? except the 
censors.^ 

There are two very pernicious things in an artistocracy — ex- 
cess either of poverty, or of wealth in the nobility. To prevent 
their poverty, it is necessary, above all things, to oblige them 
to pay their debts in time. To moderate the excess of wealth, 
prudent and gradual regulations should be made ; but no con- 
fiscations, no agrarian laws, no expunging of debts ; these are 
productive of infinite mischief. 

The laws ought to abolish the right of primogeniture among 
the nobles,^ to the end that by a continual division of the in- 
heritances their fortunes may be always upon a level. 



a Amelot de la Housaye, " Of the Gov- 
ernment of Venice," part III. The 
Claudian law forbade the senators to 
have any ship at sea tliat held above 
forty bushels. — Liv., lib XXI. cap. Ixiii. 

b The informers throw their scrolls 
into it. 

c Their vote is secret; whereas at 
Rome it was public. — Ed. 

d See Livy, lib. XLIX. A censor 



could not be troubled even by a censor; 
each made his remark without taking 
the opinion of his colleague; and when 
it otherwise happened, the censorship 
was in a manner abolished. 

e At Athens the Logistae, who made 
all the magistrates accountable for their 
conduct, gave no account themselves. 

/ It is so practised at Venice. — Am- 
elot de la Housaye, pp. 30 and 31. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 53 

There should be no substitutions, no powers of redemption, 
no rights of Majorasgo, or adoption. The contrivances for 
perpetuating the grandeur of famihes in monarchical govern- 
ments ought never to be employed in aristocracies. S' 

When the laws have compassed the equality of families, the 
next thing is to preserve a proper harmony and union amongst 
them. The quarrels of the nobility ought to be quickly de- 
cided ; otherwise the contests of individuals become those of 
families. Arbiters may terminate, or even prevent, the rise of 
disputes. 

In fine, the laws must not favor the distinctions raised by 
vanity among families, vnider pretence that they are more noble 
or ancient than others. Pretences of this nature ought to be 
ranked among the weaknesses of private persons. 

We have only to cast an eye upon Sparta ; there we may 
see how the Ephori contrived to check the foibles of the kings,^ 
as well as those of the nobility and common people. 

9. — In what Manner the Laws are in relation to their 
Principle in Monarchies 

As honor is the principle of a monarchical government, the 
laws ought to be in relation to this principle. 

They should endeavor to support the nobility, in respect 
to whom honor may be, in some measure, deemed both child 
and parent. 

They should render the nobility hereditary, not as a boundary 
between the power of the prince and the weakness of the peo- 
ple, but as the link which connects them both. 

In this government, substitutions which preserve the estates 
of families undivided are extremely useful, though in others 
not so proper. 

Here the power of redemption is of service, as it restores to 
noble families the lands that had been alienated by the prodi- 
gality of a parent. 

The land of the nobility ought to have privileges as well as 
their persons. The monarch's dignity is inseparable from that 

g The main design of some aristocra- /i These were not kings of .Sparfa, but 

cies seems to he less the support of the pretenders. The true sovereigns were 
state than of their nobility. the I'^phori, since royalty itself was sub- 

servient to them. — Ed. 



54 MONTESQUIEU 

of his kingdom ; and the dignity of the nobleman from that 
of his fief. 

All these privileges must be peculiar to the nobility, and in- 
communicable to the people, unless we intend to act contrary 
to the principle of government, and to diminish the power of 
the nobles together with that of the people. 

Substitutions are a restraint to commerce, the power of re- 
demption produces an infinite number of processes ; every 
estate in land that is sold throughout the kingdom is in some 
measure without an owner for the space of a year. Privileges 
annexed to fiefs give a power very burdensome to those gov- 
ernments which tolerate them. These are the inconveniences 
of nobility — inconveniences, however, that vanish when con- 
fronted with its general utility : but when these privileges are 
communicated to the people, every principle of government 
is wantonly violated. 

In monarchies a person may leave the bulk of his estate to 
one of his children — a permission improper in any other gov- 
ernment. 

The laws ought to favor all kinds of commerce^ consistent 
with the constitution, to the end that the subjects may, without 
ruining themselves, be able to satisfy the continual cravings of 
the prince and his court. 

They should establish some regulation that the manner of 
collecting the taxes may not be more burdensome than the 
taxes themselves. 

The weight of duties produces labor, labor weariness, and 
weariness the spirit of indolence. 



ID. — Of the Expedition peculiar to the Executive Power in 

Monarchies 

Great is the advantage which a monarchical government 
has over a republic : as the state is conducted by a single per- 
son, the executive power is thereby enabled to act with greater 
expedition. But as this expedition may degenerate into rapid- 
ity, the laws should use some contrivance to slacken it. They 
ought not only to favor the nature of each constitution, but 

t It is tolerated only in the common Comm. et Mercatoribus," which is full 
people. See the third law Cod. " de of good sense. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 55 

likewise to remedy the abuses that might result from this very 
nature. 

Cardinal Richelieu; advises monarchs to permit no such 
things as societies or communities that raise difificulties upon 
every trifle. If this man's heart had not been bewitched with 
the love of despotic power, still these arbitrary notions would 
have filled his head. 

The bodies intrusted with the deposition of the laws are 
never more obedient than when they proceed slowly, and use 
that reflection in the prince's affairs which can scarcely be ex- 
pected from the ignorance of a court, or from the precipitation 
of its councils.^ 

What would have become of the finest monarchy in the world 
if the magistrates, by their delays, their complaints and en- 
treaties, had not checked the rapidity even of their princes' 
virtues, when these monarchs, consulting only the generous 
impulse of their minds, would fain have given a boundless re- 
ward to services performed with an unlimited courage and 
fidelity ? 

II. — Of the Excellence of a Monarchical Government 

Monarchy has a great advantage over a despotic govern- 
ment. As it naturally requires there should be several orders 
or ranks of subjects, the state is more permanent, the constitu- 
tion more steady, and the person of him who governs more 
secure. 

Cicero? is of opinion that the establishing of the tribunes 
preserved the republic. " And, indeed," says he, " the violence 
of a headless people is more terrible. A chief or head is sen- 
sible that the afifair depends upon himself, and, therefore, he 
thinks ; but the people in their impetuosity are ignorant of the 
danger into which they hurry themselves." This reflection 
may be applied to a despotic government, which is a people 
without tribunes ; and to a monarchy, where the people have 
some sort of tribunes. 

Accordingly it is observable that in the commotions of a 
despotic government, the people, hurried away by their pas- 
sions, are apt to push things as far as they can go. The dis- 

;■ " Testam. polit." equi regium videtur. — Tacit. " Annal." 

k Barbaris cunctatio servilis, statim ex- lib. V. can. xxxii. 

/ Lib. III. " do Leg." 10. 



56 MONTESQUIEU 

orders they commit are all extreme; whereas in monarchies 
matters are seldom carried to excess. The chiefs are appre- 
hensive on their own account ; they are afraid of being aban- 
doned, and the intermediate dependent powers'" do not choose 
that the populace should have too much the upper hand. It 
rarely happens that the states of the kingdom are entirely cor- 
rupted : the prince adheres to these ; and the seditious, who 
have neither will nor hopes to subvert the government, have 
neither power nor will to dethrone the prince. 

In these circumstances men of prudence and authority inter- 
fere ; moderate measures are first proposed, then complied 
with, and things at length are redressed ; the laws resume their 
vigor, and command submission. 

Thus all our histories are full of civil wars without revolu- 
tions, while the histories of despotic governments abound with 
revolutions without civil wars. 

The writers of the history of the civil wars of some countries, 
even those who fomented them, sufficiently demonstrate the 
little foundation princes have to suspect the authority with 
which they invest particular bodies of men ; since, even under 
the unhappy circumstance of their errors, they sighed only after 
the laws and their duty ; and restrained, more than they were 
capable of inflaming, the impetuosity of the revolted.^ 

Cardinal Richelieu, reflecting perhaps that he had too much 
reduced the states of the kingdom, has recourse to the virtues 
of the prince and of his ministers for the support^ of govern- 
ment : but he requires so many things, that indeed there is 
none but an angel capable of such attention, such resolution 
and knowledge ; and scarcely can we flatter ourselves that we 
shall ever see such a prince and ministers while monarchy sub- 
sists. 

As people who live under a good government are happier 
than those who without rule or leaders wander about the for- 
ests, so monarchs who live under the fundamental laws of their 
country are far happier than despotic princes who have nothing 
to regulate, neither their own passions nor those of their sub- 
jects. 

m See the first note of book II. « Memoirs of Cardinal de Retz and 

chap. 4. other histories. 

o " Testam. polit." 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 57 

12. — The same Subject continued 

Let us not look for magnanimity in despotic governments ;P 
the prince cannot impart a greatness which he has not himself ; 
with him there is no such thing as glory. 

It is in monarchies that we behold the subjects encircling 
the throne, and cheered by the irradiancy of the sovereign ; 
there it is that each person filling, as it were, a larger space, is 
capable of exercising those virtues which adorn the soul, not 
with independence, but with true dignity and greatness. 

13. — An Idea of Despotic Pozver 

When the savages of Louisiana are desirous of fruit, they 
cut the tree to the root, and gather the fruit.g This is an em- 
blem of despotic government. 

14. — In zvhat Manner the Laws are in relation to the 
Principles of Despotic Government 

The principle of despotic government is fear ; but a timid, 
ignorant, and faint-spirited people have no occasion for a great 
number of laws. 

Everything ought to depend here on two or three ideas ; 
hence there is no necessity that any new notions should be 
added. When we want to break a horse, we take care not to 
let him change his master, his lesson, or his pace. Thus an 
impression is made on his brain by two or three motions, and 
no more. 

If a prince is shut up in a seraglio, he cannot leave his 
voluptuous abode without alarming those who keep him con- 
fined. They will not bear that his person and power should 
pass into other hands. He seldom, therefore, wages war in 
person, and hardly ventures to intrust the command to his 
generals. 

A prince of this stamp, unaccustomed to resistance in his 
palace, is enraged to see his will opposed by armed force ; 
hence he is generally governed by wrath or vengeance. Be- 
sides, he can have no notion of true glory. War, therefore, is 

p Voltaire maintains that the con- and many others of despotic sway con- 
queror of Candia, the Vizier Ibrahim, tradict this statement.— Ed. 

q " Edifying Letters," col. ii. p. 315. 



58 MONTESQUIEU 

carried on under such a government in its full natural fury, and 
less extent is given to the law of nations than in other states. 

Such a prince has so many imperfections, that they are 
afraid to expose his natural stupidity to public view. He is 
concealed in his palace, and the people are ignorant of his situa- 
tion. It is lucky for him that the inhabitants of those countries 
need only the name of a prince to govern them. 

When Charles XII was at Bender,?' he met with some op- 
position from the senate of Sweden ; upon which he wrote word 
home that he would send one of his boots to command them. 
This boot would have governed like a despotic prince. 

If the prince is a prisoner, he is supposed to be dead, and 
another mounts the throne. The treaties made by the prisoner 
are void, his successor will not ratify them; and, indeed, as he is 
the law, the state, and the prince : when he is no longer a prince, 
he is nothing : were he not therefore deemed to be deceased, the 
state would be subverted. 

One thing which chiefly determined the Turks to conclude 
a separate peace with Peter I was the Muscovites telling the 
Vizier that in Sweden another prince had been placed upon 
the throne.-y 

The preservation of the state is only the preservation of the 
prince, or rather of the palace where he is confined. Whatever 
does not directly menace this palace or the capital makes no 
impression on ignorant, proud, and prejudiced minds ; and as 
for the concatenation of events, they are unable to trace, to 
foresee, or even to conceive it. Politics, with its several springs 
and laws, must here be very much limited ; the political govern- 
ment is as simple as the civil.^ 

The whole is reduced to reconciling the political and civil 
administration to the domestic government, the officers of state 
to those of the seraglio. 

Such a state is happiest when it can look upon itself as the 
only one in the world, when it is environed with deserts, and 
separated from those people whom they call Barbarians. Since 
it cannot depend on the militia, it is proper it should destroy 
a part of itself. 

r The king was not then at Bender, t According to Sir John Chardin, there 

but at Demotica.— D. is no council of state in Persia.* 

i Continuation of Puffendorf's intro- 

duction to the " History of Europe," in * See Chardin, chap. xi. 
the article of Sweden, chap. x. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 59 

As fear is the principle of despotic government, its end is 
trancjuillity ; but this tranquiUity cannot be called a peace ; no, 
it is only the silence of those towns which the enemy is ready 
to invade. 

Since strength does not lie in the state, but in the army that 
founded it, in order to defend the state the army must be pre- 
served, how formidable soever to the prince. How, then, can 
we reconcile the security of the government to that of the 
prince's person? 

Observe how industriously the Russian government en- 
deavors to temper its arbitrary power, which it finds more 
burdensome than the people themselves. They have broken 
their numerous guards, mitigated criminal punishments, 
erected tribunals, entered into a knowledge of the laws, and 
instructed the people. But there are particular causes that will 
probably once more involve them in the very misery which they 
now endeavor to avoid. 

In those states religion has more influence than anywhere 
else; it is fear added to fear. In Mahommedan countries, it is 
partly from their religion that the people derive the surprising 
veneration they have for their prince. 

It is religion that amends in some measures the Turkish con- 
stitution. The subjects, who have no attachment of honor to 
the glory and grandeur of the state, are connected with it by 
the force and principle of religion. 

Of all despotic governments there is none that labors more 
under its own weight than that wherein the prince declares 
himself proprietor of all the lands, and heir to all his subjects. 
Hence the neglect of agriculture arises ; and if the prince inter- 
meddles likewise in trade, all manner of industry is ruined. 

Under this sort of government, nothing is repaired or im- 
proved." Houses are built only for the necessity of habitation ; 
there is no digging of ditches or planting of trees ; everything 
is drawn from, but nothing restored to, the earth ; the ground 
lies untilled, and the whole country becomes a desert. 

Is it to be imagined that the laws which abolish the property 
of land and the succession of estates will diminish the avarice 
and cupidity of the great? By no means. They will rather 
stimulate this cupidity and avarice. The great men will be 

u See Kicaut, " State of the Ottoman Empire," p. 196. 



6o MONTESQUIEU 

prompted to use a thousand oppressive methods, imagining 
they have no other property than the gold and silver which they 
are able to seize upon by violence, or to conceal. 

To prevent, therefore, the utter ruin of the state, the avidity 
of the prince ought to be moderated by some established cus- 
tom. Thus, in Turkey, the sovereign is satisfied with the right 
of three per cent, on the value of inheritances.'^ But as he gives 
the greatest part of the lands to his soldiery, and disposes of 
them as he pleases; as he seizes on all the inheritances of the 
officers of the empire at their decease ; as he has the property 
of the possessions of those who die without issue, and the 
daughters have only the usufruct : it thence follows that the 
greatest part of the estates of the country are held in a pre- 
carious manner. 

By the laws of Bantam,^ the king seizes on the whole in- 
heritance, even wife, children, and habitation. In order to 
elude the cruellest part of this law, they are obliged to marry 
their children at eight, nine, or ten years of age, and some- 
times younger, to the end that they may not be a wretched part 
of the father's succession. 

In countries where there are no fundamental laws, the succes- 
sion to the empire cannot be fixed. The crown is then elective, 
and the right of electing is in the prince, who names a successor 
either of his own or of some other family. In vain would it 
be to establish here the succession of the eldest son ; the prince 
might always choose another. The successor is declared by the 
prince himself, or by a civil war. Hence a despotic state is, 
upon another account, more liable than a monarchical govern- 
ment to dissolution. 

As every prince of the royal family is held equally capable 
of being chosen, hence it follows that the prince who ascends 
the throne immediately strangles his brothers, as in Turkey ; 
or puts out their eyes, as in Persia ^^ or bereaves them of their 
understanding, as in the Mogul's country ; or if these precau- 
tions are not used, as in Morocco, the vacancy of the throne is 
always attended with the horrors of a civil war. 

V See concerning the inheritances of East India Company," torn. i. The law 

the Turks, Ancient and Modern Sparta. of Pegu is less cruel : if there happen to 

See also Ricaut on the Ottoman empire. be children, the king succeeds only to 

w " Collection of Voyages that con- two-thirds. Ibid. torn. iii. p. i. 

tributed to the establishment of the x Chardin, chap. i. and iii. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 6i 

By the constitution of Russia^ the Czar may choose whom 
he has a mind for his successor, whether of his own or of a 
strange family. Such a settlement produces a thousand revolu- 
tions, and renders the throne as tottering as the succession is 
arbitrary. The right of succession being one of those things 
which are of most importance to the people to know, the best 
is that which most sensibly strikes them. Such as a certain 
order of birth. A settlement of this kind puts a stop to in- 
trigues, and stifles ambition ; the mind of a weak prince is no 
longer enslaved, nor is he made to speak his will as he is just 
expiring. 

When the succession is established by a fundamental law, 
only one prince is the successor, and his brothers have neither 
a real nor apparent right to dispute the crown with him. They 
can neither pretend to nor take any advantage of the will of a 
father. There is then no more occasion to confine or kill the 
king's brother than any other subject. 

But in despotic governments, where the prince's brothers 
are equally his slaves and his rivals, prudence requires that 
their persons be secured ; especially in Mahommedan countries, 
where religion considers victory or success as a divine decision 
in their favor ; so that they have no such thing as a monarch 
dc jure, but only de -facto. 

There is a far greater incentive to ambition in countries 
where the princes of the blood are sensible that if they do not 
ascend the throne they must be either imprisoned or put to 
death, than amongst us, where they are placed in such a sta- 
tion as may satisfy, if not their ambition, at least their moderate 
desires. 

The princes of despotic governments have ever perverted the 
use of marriage. They generally take a great many wives, es- 
pecially in that part of the world where absolute power is in 
some measure naturalized, namely, Asia. Hence they come to 
have such a multitude of children that they can hardly have any 
great affection for them, nor the children for one another. 

The reigning family resembles the state ; it is too weak itself, 
and its head too powerful ; it seems very numerous and exten- 
sive, and yet is suddenly extinct. Artaxerxeso put all his chil- 
dren to death for conspiring against him. It is not at all prob- 

y See the different constitutions, especially that of 1722. a See Justin. 



62 MONTESQUIEU 

able that fifty children would conspire against their father, and 
much less that this conspiracy would be owing to his having 
refused to resign his concubine to his eldest son. It is more 
natural to believe that the whole was an intrigue of those ori- 
ental seraglios, where fraud, treachery, and deceit reign in si- 
lence and darkness ; and where an old prince, grown every day 
more infirm, is the first prisoner of the palace. 

After what has been said, one would imagine that human 
nature should perpetually rise up against despotism. But, not- 
withstanding the love of liberty, so natural to mankind, not- 
withstanding their innate detestation of force and violence, 
most nations are subject to this very government. This is 
easily accounted for. To form a moderate government, it is 
necessary to combine the several powers ; to regulate, temper, 
and set them in motion ; to give, as it were, ballast to one, in 
order to enable it to counterpoise the other. This is a master- 
piece of legislation, rarely produced by hazard, and seldom 
attained by prudence. On the contrary, a despotic government 
offers itself, as it were, at first sight ; it is uniform throughout ; 
and as passions only are requisite to establish it, this is what 
every capacity may reach. 

15. — The same Subject continued 

In warm climates, where despotic power generally prevails, 
the passions disclose themselves earlier, and are sooner extin- 
guished -p the understanding is sooner ripened ; they are less 
in danger of squandering their fortunes ; there is less facility 
of distinguishing themselves in the world ; less communica- 
tion between young people, who are confined at home ; they 
marry much earlier, and consequently may be sooner of age 
than in our European climates. In Turkey they are of age at 
fifteen.^ 

They have no such thing as a cession of goods ; in a gov- 
ernment where there is no fixed property, people depend rather 
on the person than on his estate. 

The cession of goods is naturally admitted in moderate gov- 
ernments,&lt;i but especially in republics, because of the greater 

h See the book of laws as relative to c Laquilletiere, " Ancient and Modern 

the nature of the climate, Spirit of Laws, Sparta," p. 463. 

XIV. d The same may be said of composi" 

tions in regard to fair bankrupts. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 63 

confidence usually placed in the probity of the citizens, and the 
lenity and moderation arising from a form of government which 
every subject seems to have preferred to all others. 

Had the legislators of the Roman republic established the 
cession of goods/ they never would have been exposed to so 
many seditions and civil discords ; neither would they have 
experienced the danger of the evils, nor the inconvenience of 
the remedies. 

Poverty and the precariousness of property in a despotic 
state render usury natural, each person raising the value of his 
money in proportion to the danger he sees in lending it. Mis- 
ery, therefore, pours from all parts into those unhappy coun- 
tries ; they are bereft of everything, even of the resource of 
borrowing. 

Hence it is that a merchant under this government is unable 
to carry on an extensive commerce ; he lives from hand to 
mouth ; and were he to encumber himself with a large quan- 
tity of merchandise, he would lose more by the exorbitant in- 
terest he must give for money than he could possibly get by the 
goods. Hence they have no laws here relating to commerce ; 
they are all reduced to what is called the bare police. 

A government cannot be unjust without having hands to 
exercise its injustice. Now, it is impossible but that these hands 
will be grasping for themselves. The embezzling of the public 
money is therefore natural in despotic states. 

As this is a common crime under such a government, con- 
fiscations are very useful. By these the people are eased ; the 
money drawn by this method being a considerable tribute which 
could hardly be raised on the exhausted subject: neither is 
there in those cotmtries any one family which the prince would 
be glad to preserve. 

In moderate governments it is quite a different thing. Con- 
fiscations would render property uncertain, would strip inno- 
cent children, would destroy a whole family, instead of punish- 
ing a single criminal. In republics they would be attended with 
the mischief of subverting equality, which is the very soul of 
this government, by depriving a citizen of his necessary sub- 
sistence. 

e There was no such establishment prison and from an ignominious division 
made till the Julian law, Dc cessione of their goods, 
bonorum; which preserved them from 



64 MONTESQUIEU 

There is a Roman law^ against confiscations, except in the 
case of crimen majestatis, or high treason of the most heinous 
nature. It would be a prudent thing to follow the spirit of this 
law, and to limit confiscations to particular crimes.^ In coun- 
tries where a local custom has rendered real estates alienable, 
Bodin very justly observes that confiscations should extend 
only to such as are purchased or acquired./j 

1 6. — Of the Communication of Power 

In a despotic government the power is communicated entire 
to the person intrusted with it. The vizier himself is the des- 
potic prince ; and each particular officer is the vizier. In mon- 
archies the power is less immediately applied, being tempered 
by the monarch as he gives li.i He makes such a distribution 
of his authority as never to communicate a part of it without 
reserving a greater share to himself. 

Hence in monarchies the governors of towns are not so de- 
pendent on the governor of the province as not to be still more 
so on the prince ; and the private ofBcers or military bodies 
are not so far subject to their general as not to owe still a greater 
subjection to their sovereign. 

In most monarchies it has been wisely regulated that those 
who have an extensive command should not belong to any 
military corps ; so that as they have no authority but through 
the prince's pleasure, and as they may be employed or not, 
they are in some measure in the service, and in some measure 
out of it. 

This is incompatible with a despotic government. For if 
those who are not actually employed were still invested with 
privileges and titles, the consequence must be that there would 
be men in the state who might be said to be great of themselves ; 
a thing directly opposite to the nature of this government. 

Were the governor of a town independent of the pasha, ex- 
pedients would be daily necessary to make them agree ; which 
is highly absurd in a despotic state. Besides, if a particular 
governor should refuse to obey, how could the other answer 
for his province with his head ? 

f Authentica bona damnatorum. — Cod. h Book V. chap. iii. 

de bon damn. i " Ut esse Phosbi dulcius lumen solet 



g They seem to have been too fond of Jamjam cadentis " 

confiscations in the republic of Athens. — Sen. " Trias," act v. sc. i. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 65 

In this kind of government, authority must ever be waver- 
ing ; nor is that of the lowest magistrate more steady than that 
of the despotic prince. Under moderate governments, the 
law is prudent in all its parts, and perfectly well known, so 
that even the pettiest magistrates are capable of following it. 
But in a despotic state, where the prince's will is the law, though 
the prince were wise, yet how could the magistrate follow a 
will he does not know ? He must certainly follow his own. 

Again, as the law is only the prince's will, and as the prince 
can only will what he knows, the consequence is, that there are 
an infinite number of people who must will for him, and make 
their wills keep pace with his. 

In fine, as the law is the momentary will of the prince, it is 
necessary that those who will for him should follow his sud- 
den manner of willing. 

17. — Of Presents 

It is a received custom in despotic countries never to ad- 
dress any superior whomsoever, not excepting their kings, 
without making them a present.; The MogulA^ never receives 
the petitions of his subjects if they come with empty hands. 
These princes spoil even their own favors. 

But thus it must ever be in a government where no man 
is a citizen; where they have all a notion that a superior is 
under no obligation to an inferior ; where men imagine them- 
selves bound by no other tie than the chastisements inflicted 
by one party upon another ; where, in fine, there is very little 
to do, and where the people have seldom an occasion of pre- 
senting themselves before the great, of offering their petitions, 
and much less their complaints. 

In a republic, presents are odious, because virtue stands in 
no need of them. In monarchies, honor is a much stronger 
incentive than presents. But in a despotic government, where 
there is neither honor nor virtue, people cannot be determined 
to act but through hope of the conveniences of life. 

It is in conformity with republican ideas that Plato/ ordered 
those who received presents for doing their duty, to be pun- 

y Chardin, chap. xi. trihutod to the estahlishment of the 

/["Collection of Voyages that con- East India Company." torn. i. p. 80. 

/ Book XII. of Laws. 

toL. I.— 5 



66 MONTESQUIEU 

ished with death. " They must not take presents/' says he, 
" neither for good nor for evil actions." 

A very bad law was that among the Romans"? which gave the 
magistrates leave to accept small presents," provided they did 
not exceed one hundred crowns in the whole year. They who 
receive nothing expect nothing ; they who receive a little soon 
covet more, till at length their desires swell to an exorbitant 
height. Besides, it is much easier to convict a man who knows 
himself obliged to accept no present at all, and yet will accept 
something, than a person who takes more when he ought to 
take less, and who always finds pretexts, excuses, and plausible 
reasons in justification of his conduct. 



1 8. — Of Rewards conferred by the Sovereign 

In despotic governments, where, as we have already ob- 
served, the principal motive of action is the hope of the con- 
veniences of life, the prince who confers rewards has nothing 
to bestow but money. In monarchies, where honor alone pre- 
dominates, the prince's rewards would consist only of marks of 
distinction, if the distinctions established by honor were not 
attended with luxury, which necessarily brings on its wants : 
the prince, therefore, is obliged to confer such honors as lead 
to wealth. But in a republic where virtue reigns — a motive 
self-sufficient, and which excludes all others — the recompenses 
of the state consist only of public attestations of this virtue. 

It is a general rule, that great rewards in monarchies and re- 
publics are a sign of their decline ; because they are a proof of 
their principles being corrupted, and that the idea of honor 
has no longer the same force in a monarchy, nor the title of 
citizen the same weight in a republic. 

The very worst Roman emperors were those who were most 
profuse in their largesses ; for example, Caligula, Claudius, 
Nero, Otho, Vitellius, Commodus, Heliogabalus, and Cara- 
calla. The best, as Augustus, Vespasian, Antoninus Pius, Mar- 
cus Aurelius, and Pertinax, were economists. Under good em- 
perors the state resumed its principles ; all other treasures were 
supplied by that of honor. 

m Leg. s, sec. ad leg. Jul. repet. n Munuscula. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 67 



19, — New Consequences of the Principles of the three 

Governments 

I cannot conclude this book without making some applica- 
tions of my three principles. 

1st Question.'] It is a question whether the laws ought to 
oblige a subject to accept a pubhc employment. My opinion 
is that they ought in a republic, but not in a monarchical gov- 
ernment. In the former, public employments are attestations 
of virtue, depositions with which a citizen is intrusted by his 
country, for whose sake alone he ought to live, to act, and to 
thrnk ; consequently he cannot refuse them.o In the latter, pub- 
lic offices are testimonials of honor ; now such is the capricious- 
ness of honor that it chooses to accept none of these testimonies 
but when and in what manner it pleases. 

The late King of Sardinia/' inflicted punishments on his sub- 
jects who refused the dignities and public ofifices of the state. 
In this he unknowingly followed republican ideas : but his 
method of governing in other respects sufficiently proves that 
this was not his intention. 

2d Question.] Secondly, it is questioned whether a subject 
should be obliged to accept a post in the army inferior to that 
which he held before. Among the Romans it was usual to see 
a captain serve the next year under his lieutenant.? This is be- 
cause virtue in republics requires a continual sacrifice of our 
persons and of our repugnances for the good of the state. But 
in monarchies, honor, true or false, will never bear with what it 
calls degrading itself. 

In despotic governments, where honor, posts, and ranks are 
equally abused, they indiscriminately make a prince a scullion, 
and a scullion a prince. 

30? Question.] Thirdly, it may be inquired, whether civil and 
military employments should be conferred on the same person. 
In republics I think they should be joined, but in monarchies 
separated. In the former it would be extremely dangerous to 

o Plato, in his " Republic," book q Some centurions having appealed to 
VIII., ranks these refusals among the the people for the employments which 
marks of the corruption of a republic. they had before enjoyed, " It is just, my 
In his " Laws," book VI., he orders comrades," said a centurion, "that you 
thern to be punished by a fine. At should look upon every post as honor- 
Venice they are punished with banish- able in which you have an opportunity 
inent- of defending the republic."— Livy, dec. 

p Victor Amadeus. S, lib. XLII. 



68 MONTESQUIEU 

make the profession of arms a particular state, distinct from 
that of civil functions ; and in the latter, no less dangerous 
would it be to confer these two employments on the same per- 
son. 

In republics a person takes up arms only with a view to de- 
fend his country and its laws ; it is because he is a citizen he 
makes himself for a while a soldier. Were these two distinct 
states, the person who under arms thinks himself a citizen 
would soon be made sensible he is only a soldier. 

In monarchies, they whose condition engages them in the 
profession of arms have nothing but glory, or at least honor or 
fortune, in view. To men, therefore, like these, the* prince 
should never give any civil employments; on the contrary, 
they ought to be checked by the civil magistrate, that the same 
persons may not have at the same time the confidence of the 
people and the power to abuse it.** 

We have only to cast an eye on a nation that may be justly 
called a republic, disguised under the form of monarchy, and 
we shall see how jealous they are of making a separate order 
of the profession of arms, and how the military state is con- 
stantly allied with that of the citizen, and even sometimes of 
the magistrate, to the end that these qualities may be a pledge 
for their country, which should never be forgotten. 

The division of civil and military employments, made by 
the Romans after the extinction of the republic, was not an 
arbitrary thing. It was a consequence of the change which 
happened in the constitution of Rome ; it was natural to a 
monarchical government ; and what was only commenced 
under Augustus,-^ succeeding emperors' were obliged to finish, 
in order to temper the military government. 

Procopius, therefore, the competitor of Valens the emperor, 
was very much to blame when, conferring the proconsular dig- 
nity" upon Hormisdas, a prince of the blood royal of Persia, 
he restored to this magistracy the military command of which 
it had been formerly possessed; unless, indeed, he had very 
particular reasons for so doing. A person that aspires to the 

r " Ne imperium ad optimos nobilium consuls, and governors of the privilege 

transferretur, Senafum militia vetuit of wearing arms.— Dio. lib. LIII. 

Gallienus, etiam adire exercitum."— t Constantine. See Zozimus, lib. II. 

Aurelius Victor, " de virii illustribus." u Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. XXVI., 

s Augustus deprived the senators, pro- " More veterum et bella recturo." 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS ' 69 

sovereignty concerns himself less about what is serviceable to 
the state than what is likely to promote his own interest. 

4th Question.] Fourthly, it is a question whether public em- 
ployments should be sold. They ought not, I think, in despotic 
governments, where the subjects must be instantaneously 
placed or displaced by the prince. 

But in monarchies this custom is not at all improper, by 
reason it is an inducement to engage in that as a family employ- 
ment^ which would not be undertaken through a motive of 
virtue ; it fixes likewise every one in his duty, and renders the 
several orders of the kingdom more permanent. Suidasw very 
justly observes, that Anastasius had changed the empire into a 
kind of aristocracy, by selling all public employments. 

PlatoA' cannot bear with this prostitution : " This is ex- 
actly," says he, " as if a person were to be made a mariner or 
pilot of a ship, for his money. Is it possible that this rule should 
be bad in every other employment of life, and hold good only 
in the administration of a republic ? " But Plato speaks of a 
republic founded on virtue, and we of a monarchy. Now, in 
monarchies (where, though there were no such thing as a reg- 
ular sale of public offices, still the indigence and avidity of the 
courtier would equally prompt him to expose them to sale) 
chance will furnish better subjects than the prince's choice. In 
short, the method of attaining to honors through riches in- 
spires and cherishes industry ,3* a thing extremely wanting in 
this kind of government. 

5//^ Question.] The fifth question is, in what kind of govern- 
ment censors are necessary. My answer is, that they are neces- 
sary in a republic, where the principle of government is virtue. 
We must not imagine that criminal actions only are destructive 
of virtue ; it is destroyed also by omissions, by neglects, by a 
certain coolness in the love of our country, by bad examples, 
and by the seeds of corruption : whatever does not openly vio- 
late but elude the laws, does not subvert but weaken them, 
ought to fall under the inquiry and correction of the censors. 

V Voltaire exclaims, " Let us lament w Fracrmcnts talcen from the embassies 

that Montesquieu has defamed his work of Constantine I'oriihyrogcnilus. 
by such paradoxes. Hut we can forgive x " Rcpub." lib. Vltl. 

him: his uncle purchased the office of v We see the laziness of Spain, where 

President in the country, and left it to all public employments are given away, 
him. After all we find the man. No 
one of us is without his weak point." — 
Ed. 



70 MONTESQUIEU 

We are surprised at the punishment of the Areopagite for 
kilHng a sparrow which, to escape the pursuit of a hawk, had 
taken shelter in his bosom. Surprised we are also that an 
Areopagite should put his son to death for putting out the eyes 
of a little bird. But let us reflect, that the question here does 
not relate to a criminal sentence, but to a judgment concern- 
ing manners in a republic founded on manners. 

In monarchies there should be no censors ; the former are 
founded on honor, and the nature of honor is to have the whole 
world for its censor. Every man who fails in this article is 
subject to the reproaches even of those who are void of honor. 

Here the censors would be spoiled by the very people whom 
they ought to correct : they could not prevail against the cor- 
ruption of a monarchy ; the corruption rather would be too 
strong against them. 

Hence it is obvious that there ought to be no censors in 
despotic governments. The example of China seems to dero- 
gate from this rule ; but we shall see, in the course of this work, 
the particular reasons of that institution. 



BOOK VI 

CONSEQUENCES OF THE PRINCIPLES OF DIF- 
FERENT GOVERNMENTS WITH RESPECT TO 
THE SIMPLICITY OF CIVIL AND CRIMINAL 
LAWS, THE FORM OF JUDGMENTS, AND THE 
INFLICTING OF PUNISHMENTS 

I. — Of the Simplicity of Civil Lazvs in different Governments 

MONARCHIES do not permit of so great a simplicity 
of laws as despotic governments. For in monarchies 
there must be courts of judicature; these must give 
their decisions ; the decisions must be preserved and learned, 
that we may judge in the same manner to-day as yesterday, 
and that the lives and property of the citizens may be as cer- 
tain and fixed as the very constitution of the state. 

In monarchies, the administration of justice, which decides 
not only in whatever belongs to life and property, but like- 
wise to honor, demands very scrupulous inquiries. The deli- 
cacy of the judge increases in proportion to the increase of his 
trust, and of the importance of the interests on which he de- 
termines. 

We must not, therefore, be surprised to find so many rules, 
restrictions, and extensions in the laws of those countries — 
rules that multiply the particular cases, and seem to make of 
reason itself an art. 

The difference of rank, birth, and condition established in 
monarchical governments is frequently attended with distinc- 
tions in the nature of property ; and the laws relating to the 
constitution of this government may augment the number of 
these distinctions. Hence, among us goods are divided into 
real estates, purchases, dowries, paraphernalia, paternal and 
maternal inheritances ; movables of different kinds ; estates 
held in fee-simple, or in tail ; acquired by descent or convey- 

71 



72 MONTESQUIEU 

ance; allodial, or held by socage; ground rents; or annui- 
ties. Each sort of goods is subject to particular rules, which 
must be complied with in the disposal of them. These things 
must needs diminish the simplicity of the laws. 

In our governments the fiefs have become hereditary. It was 
necessary that the nobility should have a fixed property, that is, 
the fief should have a certain consistency, to the end that the 
proprietor might be always in a capacity of serving the prince. 
This must have been productive of great varieties ; for in- 
stance, there are countries where fiefs could not be divided 
among the brothers ; in others, the younger bro, hers may be 
allowed a more generous subsistence. 

The monarch who knows each of his provinces may estab- 
lish different laws or tolerate dififerent customs. But as the 
despotic prince knows nothing, and can attend to nothing, he 
must take general measures, and govern by a rigid and in- 
flexible will, which throughout his whole dominions produces 
the same effect ; in short, everything bends under his feet. 

In proportion as the decisions of the courts of judicature are 
multiplied in monarchies, the law is loaded with decrees that 
sometimes contradict one another ; either because succeeding 
judges are of a different way of thinking, or because the same 
causes are sometimes well, and at other times ill, defended ; 
or, in line, by reason of an infinite number of abuses, to which 
all human regulations are liable. This is a necessary evil, 
which the legislator redresses from time to time, as contrary 
even to the spirit of moderate governments. For when people 
are obliged to have recourse to courts of judicature, this should 
come from the nature of the constitution, and not from the con- 
tradiction or uncertainty of the law. 

In governments where there are necessary distinctions of 
persons, there must likewise be privileges. This also dimin- 
ishes the simplicity, and creates a thousand exceptions. 

One of the privileges least burdensome to society, and es- 
pecially to him who confers it, is that of pleading in one court 
in preference to another. Here new difficulties arise, when it 
becomes a question before which court we shall plead. 

Far different is the case of the people under despotic govern- 
ments. In those countries I can see nothing that the legislator 
is able to decree, or the magistrate to judge. As the lands be- 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS J3 

long to the prince, it follows that there are scarcely any civil 
laws in regard to landed property. From the right the sove- 
reign has to successions, it follows, likewise, that there are none 
relating to inheritances. The monopolies established by the 
prince for himself in some countries render all sorts of commer- 
cial laws quite useless. The marriages which they usually con- 
tract with female slaves are the cause that there are scarcely any 
civil laws relating to dowries, or to the particular advantage of 
married women. From the prodigious multitude of slaves, it 
follows, likewise, that there are very few who have any such 
thing as a will of their own, and of course are answerable for 
their conduct before a judge. Most moral actions, that are only 
in consequence of a father's, a husband's, or a master's will, are 
regulated by them, and not by the magistrates. 

I forgot to observe that as what we call honor is a thing 
hardly known in those countries, the several difificulties relat- 
ing to this article, though of such importance with us, are with 
them quite out of the question. Despotic power is self-suffi- 
cient ; round it there is an absolute vacuum. Hence it is that 
when travellers favor us with the description of countries where 
arbitrary sway prevails, they seldom make mention of civil 
laws.o 

All occasions, therefore, of wrangling and law-suits are here 
removed. And to this in part is it owing that litigious people 
in those countries are so roughly handled. As the injustice of 
their demand is neither screened, palliated, nor protected by an 
infinite number of laws, of course it is immediately discovered, 

2. — Of the Simplicity of Criminal Laws in different 

Governments 

We hear it generally said that justice ought to be adminis- 
tered with us as in Turkey. Is it possible, then, that the most 
ignorant of all nations should be the most clear-sighted on a 
point which it most behooves mankind to know? 

If we examine the set forms of justice with respect to the 
trouble the subject undergoes in recovering his property or 

a Tn Mazulipatam it could never be rcpulated in their decisions by certain 

found out tliat there was such a thing customs. The Vedas and such books 

as a written law. See the " Collection of do not contain civil laws, hut relitrious 

Voyapcs that contributed to the estab- precepts. See " Lettres cdifiantos," 14, 

Ushment of the R.ist India Compnnv." collect, 
torn. iv. part 1. p. 391. The Indians arc 



74 MONTESQUIEU 

in obtaining satisfaction for an injury or affront, we shall find 
them doubtless too numerous : but if we consider them in the 
relation they bear to the liberty and security of every individual, 
we shall often find them too few; and be convinced that the 
trouble, expense, delays, and even the very dangers of our 
judiciary proceedings are the price that each subject pays for 
his liberty. 

In Turkey, where little regard is shown to the honor, life, 
or estate of the subject, all causes are speedily decided. The 
method of determining them is a matter of indifference, pro- 
vided they be determined. The pasha, after a quick hearing, 
orders which party he pleases to be bastinadoed, and then sends 
them about their business. 

Here it would be dangerous to be of a litigious disposition ; 
this supposes a strong desire of obtaining justice, a settled aver- 
sion, an active mind, and a steadiness in pursuing one's point. 
All this should be avoided in a government where fear ought 
to be the only prevailing sentiment, and in which popular dis- 
turbances are frequently attended with sudden and unforeseen 
revolutions. Here every man ought to know that the magis- 
trate must not hear his name mentioned, and that his security 
depends entirely on his being reduced to a kind of annihilation. 

But in moderate governments, where the life of the meanest 
subject is deemed precious, no man is stripped of his honor or 
property until after a long inquiry ; and no man is bereft of life 
till his very country has attacked him — an attack that is never 
made without leaving him all possible means of making his 
defence. 

Hence It is that when a person renders himself absolute,^ he 
immediately thinks of reducing the number of laws. In a gov- 
ernment thus constituted they are more affected with particular 
inconveniences than with the liberty of the subject, which is 
very little minded. 

In republics, it is plain that as many formalities at least are 
necessary as in monarchies. In both governments they in- 
crease in proportion to the value which is set on the honor, 
fortune, liberty, and life of the subject. 

In republican governments, men are all equal ; equal they 
are also in despotic governments : in the former, because they 
are everything ; in the latter, because they are nothing. 

b Caesar, Cromwell, and many others. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 75 

3. — In what Governments and in what Cases the Judges ought 
to determine according to the express Letter of the Law 

The nearer a government approaches towards a republic, 
the more the manner of judging becomes settled and fixed ; 
hence it was a fault in the Republic of Sparta for the Ephori to 
pass such arbitrary judgments without having any laws to 
direct them. The First Consuls at Rome pronounced sentence 
in the same manner as the Ephori ; but the inconvenience of 
this proceeding was soon felt, and they were obliged to have 
recourse to express and determinate laws. 

In despotic governments there are no laws ; the judge him- 
self is his own rule. There are laws in monarchies ; and where 
these are explicit, the judge conforms to them ; where they are 
otherwise, he endeavors to investigate their spirit. In republics, 
the very nature of the constitution requires the judges to follow 
the letter of the law ; otherwise the law might be explained to 
the prejudice of every citizen, in cases where their honor, prop- 
erty, or Hfe is concerned. 

At Rome the judges had no more to do than to declare that 
the persons accused were guilty of a particular crime, and then 
the punishment was found in the laws, as may be seen in divers 
laws still extant. In England the jury give their verdict 
whether the fact brought under their cognizance be proved or 
not ; if it be proved, the judge pronounces the punishment in- 
flicted by the law, and for this he needs only to open his eyes. 

4. — Of the Manner of passing Judgment 

Hence arises the different modes of passing judgment. In 
monarchies the judges choose the method of arbitration ; they 
deliberate together, they communicate their sentiments for the 
sake of unanimity; they moderate their opinions, in order to 
render them conformable to those of others: and the lesser 
number are obliged to give way to the majority. But this is 
not agreeable to the nature of a republic. At Rome, and in 
the cities of Greece, the judges never entered into a consul- 
tation ; each gave his opinion in one of these three ways: I 
absolve, I condemn. It does not appear clear to me : c this was 

c Non liquet. 



76 MONTESQUIEU 

because the people judged, or were supposed to judge. But 
the people are far from being civilians; all these restrictions 
and methods of arbitration are above their reach ; they must 
have only one object and one single fact set before them ; and 
then they have only to see whether they ought to condemn, to 
acquit, or to suspend their judgment. 

The Romans introduced set forms of actions,^ after the ex- 
ample of the Greeks, and established a rule that each cause 
should be directed by its proper action. This was necessary in 
their manner of judging; it was necessary to fix the state of 
the question, that the people might have it always before their 
eyes. Otherwise, in a long process, this state of the question 
would continually change, and be no longer distinguished. 

Hence it followed that the Roman judges granted only the 
simple demand, without making any addition, deduction, or 
limitation. But the prcEtors devised other forms of actions, 
which were called ex bona fide, in which the method of pro- 
nouncing sentence was left to the disposition of the judge. 
This was more agreeable to the spirit of monarchy. Hence it 
is a saying among the French lawyers, " that in France ^ all 
actions are ex bona Me." 

5. — /w what Governments the Sovereign may be Judge 

Machiavel f attributes the loss of the liberty of Florence to 
the people's not judging in a body in cases of high treason 
against themselves, as was customary at Rome. For this pur- 
pose they had eight judges : " but the few," says Machiavel, 
" are corrupted by a few." I should willingly adopt the maxim 
of this great man. But as in those cases the political interest 
prevails in some measure over the civil (for it is always an in- 
convenience that the people should be judges in their own 
cause), in order to remedy this evil, the laws must provide as 
much as possible for the security of individuals. 

With this view the Roman legislators did two things : they 
gave the persons accused permission to banish themselves^ be- 

d " Quas actiones ne populus prout /"Discourse on the first Decade of 

vellet institueret, certas solemnesque Livy," book I. chap. vii. 
esse voluerunt." — Lib. II. sec. 6, Digest. g This is well explained in Cicero's 

de Orijf- Jur. oration " pro Caecina," towards the end. 

e In Prance a person, though sued for 
more than he owes, loses his costs if he 
has not offered to pay the exact debt. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 77 

fore sentence was pronounced ; h and they ordained, that the 
goods of those who were condemned should be sacred, to pre- 
vent their being confiscated to the people. We shall see in 
book XL the other limitations that were set to the judicatory 
power residing in the people. 

Solon knew how to prevent the abuse which the people 
might make of their power in criminal judgments. He or- 
dained that the Court of Areopagus should re-examine the 
aifair; that if they believed the party accused was unjustly 
acquitted,^' they should impeach him again before the people ; 
that if they believed him unjustly condemned,; they should pre- 
vent the execution of the sentence, and make them rejudge 
the proceeding — an admirable law, that subjected the people to 
the censure of the magistracy which they most revered, and 
even to their own ! 

In affairs of this kind it is always proper to throw in some 
delays, especially when the party accused is under confinement ; 
to the end that the people may grow calm and give their judg- 
ment coolly. 

In despotic governments the prince himself may be judge. 
But in monarchies this cannot be ; the constitution by such 
means would be subverted, and the dependent intermediate 
powers annihilated ; all set forms of judgment would cease ; 
fear would take possession of the people's minds, and paleness 
spread itself over every countenance : the more confidence, 
honor, affection, and security in the subject, the more extended 
is the power of the monarch. 

We shall give here a few more reflections on this point. In 
monarchies, the prince is the party that prosecutes the person 
accused, and causes him to be punished or acquitted. Now, 
were he himself to sit upon the trial, he would be both judge 
and party. 

In this government the prince has frequently the benefit of 
confiscation, so that here again, by determining criminal 
causes, he would be both judge and party. 

Further, by this method he would deprive himself of the 
most glorious attribute of sovereignty, namely, that of grant- 

h This was the law at Athens, as ap- i Demosthenes, " pro Corona," p. 494, 

pears by Demosthenes. Socrates re- edit. I-Vankf. an. 1604. 
lused to make use of it. / See Philostratus's " Lives of the 

Sophist.s," book I., Life of ilischines. 



78 



MONTESQUIEU 



ing pardon,^ for it would be quite ridiculous of him to make and 
unmake his decisions; surely he would not choose to contra- 
dict himself. 

Besides, this would be confounding all ideas ; it would be 
impossible to tell whether a man was acquitted, or received his 
pardon. 

Louis XIII being desirous to sit in judgment upon the trial 
of the Duke de la Valette,^ sent for some members of the Par- 
liament and of the Privy Council, to debate the matter; upon 
their being ordered by the King to give their opinion concern- 
ing the warrant for his arrest, the President, De Believre, said 
" that he found it very strange that a prince should pass sen- 
tence upon a subject; that kings had reserved to themselves 
the power of pardoning, and left that of condemning to their 
officers ; that his majesty wanted to see before him at the bar 
a person who, by his decision, was to be hurried away into the 
other world ! That the prince's countenance should inspire 
with hopes, and not confound with fears; that his presence 
alone removed ecclesiastic censures ; and that subjects ought 
not to go away dissatisfied from the sovereign." When sen- 
tence was passed, the same magistrate declared, " This is an 
unprecedented judgment to see, contrary to the example of 
past ages — a king of France, in the quality of a judge, con- 
demning a gentleman to death." fn 

Again, sentences passed by the prince would be an inex- 
haustible source of injustice and abuse ; the courtiers by their 
importunity would always be able to extort his decisions. 
Some Roman emperors were so mad as to sit as judges them- 
selves ; the consequence was, that no reigns ever so surprised 
the world with oppression and injustice. 

" Claudius," says Tacitus," " having appropriated to himself 
the determination of law-suits, and the function of magistrates, 
gave occasion to all manner of rapine." But Nero, upon 
coming to the empire after Claudius, endeavored to conciliate 



k Plato does not think it right that 
kings, who, as he says, are priests, 
should preside at trials where people 
are condemned to death, to exile, or to 
imprisonment. 

/ See the relation of the trial of the 
Duke de la Valette. It is printed in 
the " Memoirs of Montresor," torn. ii. 
p. 62. 

m It was afterwards revoked. See the 



same relation. It was ordinarily a 
right of the peerage that a peer crim- 
inally accused should be judged by the 
king, as Francis^ II in the trial of the 
Prince of Conde, and Charles VII in 
the case of the Due d'Alengon. To- 
day, the presence of the king at the trial 
of a peer, in order to condemn him, 
would seem an act of tyranny. — Voltaire. 
n " Annal." lib. XI. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 79 

the minds of the people by declaring " that he would take care 
not to be judge himself in private causes, that the parties 
might not be exposed within the walls of a palace to the iniqui- 
tous influence of a few freedmen." 

" Under the reign of Arcadius," says Zozimus,/' " a swarm of 
calumniators spread themselves on every side and infested the 
court. Upon a person's decease, it was immediately supposed 
he had left no children ; q and, in consequence of this, his 
property was given away by a rescript. For as the prince 
was surprisingly stupid, and the empress excessively enter- 
prising, she was a slave to the insatiable avarice of her domes- 
tics and confidants ; insomuch that to an honest man nothing 
could be more desirable than death." 

" Formerly," says Procopius,^ " there used to be very few 
people at court ; but in Justinian's reign, as the judges had no 
longer the liberty of administering justice, their tribunals were 
deserted, while the prince's palace resounded with the litigious 
clamors of the several parties." Everybody knows what a 
prostitution there was of public judgments, and even of the 
very laws themselves, at that Emperor's court. 

The laws are the eye of the prince ; by them he sees what 
would otherwise escape his observation. Should he attempt 
the function of a judge, he would not then labor for himself, 
but for impostors, whose aim is to deceive him. 

6. — That in Monarchies Ministers ought not to sit as Judges 

It is likewise a very great inconvenience in monarchies for 
the ministers of the prince to sit as judges. We have still in- 
stances of states where there are a great number of judges to 
decide exchequer causes, and where the ministers nevertheless 
(a thing most incredible !) would fain determine them. Many 
are the reflections that here arise ; but this single one will suf- 
fice for my purpose. 

There is in the very nature of things a kind of contrast be- 
tween a prince's council and his courts of judicature. The 
king's council ought to be composed of a few persons, and the 
courts of judicature of a great many. The reason is, in the 

" Anna]." lib. XIII. 9 The same disorder happened under 

P " Hist." lib. V. Theodosius the younKcr. 

r " Secret History." 



8o MONTESQUIEU 

former, things should be undertaken and conducted with a 
kind of warmth and passion, which can hardly be expected 
but from four or five men who make it their sole business. On 
the contrary, in courts of judicature a certain coolness is req- 
uisite, and an indifference, in some measure, to all manner of 
affairs. 

7. — Of a single Magistrate 

A magistracy of this kind cannot take place but in a despotic 
government. We have an instance in the Roman history how 
far a single magistrate may abuse his power. Might it not be 
very well expected that Appius on his tribunal should contemn 
all laws, after having violated that of his own enacting ? ^ Livy 
has given us the iniquitous distinction of the Decemvir. He 
had suborned a man to reclaim Virginia in his presence as his 
slave ; Virginia's relatives insisted that by virtue of his own 
law she should be consigned to them, till the definitive judg- 
ment was passed. Upon which he declared that his law had 
been enacted only in favor of the father, and that as Virginius 
was absent, no application could be made of it to the present 
case.* 

8. — Of Accusation in different Governments 

At Rome w it was lawful for one citizen to accuse another. 
This was agreeable to the spirit of a republic, where each citizen 
ought to have an unlimited zeal for the public good, and is 
supposed to hold all the rights of his country in his own hands. 
Under the emperors, the republican maxims were still pursued ; 
and instantly appeared a pernicious tribe, a swarm of informers. 
Crafty, wicked men, who could stoop to any indignity to serve 
the purposes of their ambition, were sure to busy themselves 
in the search of criminals whose condemnation might be agree- 
able to the prince ; this was the road to honor and preferment,^ 
but luckily we are strangers to it in our country. 

We have at present an admirable law, namely, that by which 
the prince, who is established for the execution of the laws, 
appoints an officer in each court of judicature to prosecute all 

s See the 2d law, sec. 24 ff. " de n And in a great many other cities. 

Orip. Jur." V See in Tacitus the rewards giveii to 

/ " Quod pater puellae abesset, locum those informers, 
injuriae esse ratus." — Livius, dec. I. lib. 
III. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 8i 

sorts of crimes in his name ; hence the profession of informers 
is a thing unknown to us, for if this pubhc avenger were sus- 
pected to abuse his office, he would soon be obHged to mention 
his author. 

By Plato's laws,«^ those who neglect to inform or to assist 
the magistrates are liable to punishment. This would not be 
so proper in our days. The public prosecutor watches for the 
safety of the citizens ; he proceeds in his office while they enjoy 
their quiet and ease. 

9. — Of the Severity of Punishments in different Governments 

The severity of punishments is fitter for despotic govern- 
ments, whose principle is terror, than for a monarchy or a re- 
public, whose spring is honor and virtue. 

In moderate governments, the love of one's country, shame, 
and the fear of blame are restraining motives, capable of pre- 
venting a multitude of crimes. Here the greatest punishment 
of a bad action is conviction. The civil laws have therefore a 
softer way of correcting, and do not require so much force and 
severity. 

In those states a good legislator is less bent upon punish- 
ing than preventing crimes ; he is more attentive to inspire 
good morals than to inflict penalties. 

It is a constant remark of the Chinese authors,-*^ that the 
more the penal laws were increased in their empire, the nearer 
they drew towards a revolution. This is because punishments 
were augmented in proportion as the public morals were cor- 
rupted. 

It would be an easy matter to prove that in all, or almost all, 
the governments of Europe, penalties have increased or di- 
minished in proportion as those governments favored or dis- 
couraged liberty. 

In despotic governments, people are so unhappy as to have 
a greater dread of death than regret for the loss of life ; con- 
sequently their punishments ought to be more severe. In mod- 
erate states they arc more afraid of losing their lives than ap- 
prehensive of the pain of dying ; those punishments, therefore, 
which deprive them simply of life are sufficient. 

w Lib. TX. _ _ in this respect, in tlie same case as a 

X I shall show hereafter that China is, republic or a monarchy. 

Vol. I.— 6 



82 MONTESQUIEU 

Men in excess of happiness or misery are equally inclinable 
to severity; witness conquerors and monks. It is mediocrity 
alone, and a mixture of prosperous and adverse fortune, that 
inspire us with lenity and pity. 

What we see practised by individuals is equally observable 
in regard to nations. In countries inhabited by savages who 
lead a very hard lif^, and in despotic governments, where there 
is only one person on whom fortune lavishes her favors, while 
the miserable subjects lie exposed to her insults, people are 
equally cruel. Lenity reigns in moderate governments. 

When in reading history we observe the cruelty of the sultans 
in administration of justice, we shudder at the very thought 
of the miseries of human nature. 

In moderate governments, a good legislator may make use 
of everything by way of punishment. Is it not very extraor- 
dinary that one of the chief penalties at Sparta was to deprive 
a person of the power of lending out his wife, or of receiving 
the wife of another man, and to oblige him to have no com- 
pany at home but virgins ? In short, whatever the law calls a 
punishment is such effectively. 

10. — Of the ancient French Lazvs 

In the ancient French laws we find the true spirit of mon- 
archy. In cases relating to pecuniary mulcts, the common 
people are less severely punished than the nobility .c But in 
criminal b cases it is quite the reverse ; the nobleman loses his 
honor and his voice in court, while the peasant, who has no 
honor to lose, undergoes a corporal punishment. 

III. — That zvhen People are virtuous few Punishments are 

necessary 

The people of Rome had some share of probity. Such was 
the force of this probity that the legislator had frequently no 
further occasion than to point out the right road, and they were 
sure to follow it ; one would imagine that instead of precepts 
it was suflficient to give them counsels. 

a Suppose, for instance, to prevent the h See the " Council of Peter Defon- 

executior of a decree, the common peo- taines," chap, xiii., especially the 22d 
pie paid a fine of forty sous, and the art. 
nobility of sixty livres. — " Somme Ra- 
fale," book II. p. 198, edit. Got. of the 
year 1512. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 83 

The punishments of the regal laws, and those of the Twelve 
Tables, were almost all abolished in the time of the republic, in 
consequence either of the Valerian c or of the Porcian law.rf 
It was never observed that this step did any manner of preju- 
dice to the civil administration. 

This Valerian law, which restrained the magistrates from 
using violent methods against a citizen that had appealed to 
the people, inflicted no other punishment on the person who 
infringed it than that of being reputed a dishonest man.^ 

12. — Of the Potver of Punishments 

Experience shows that in countries remarkable for the lenity 
of their laws the spirit of the inhabitants is as much affected 
by slight penalties as in other countries by severer punish- 
ments. 

If an inconvenience or abuse arises in the state, a violent 
government endeavors suddenly to redress it; and instead of 
putting the old laws in execution, it establishes some cruel 
punishment, which instantly puts a stop to the evil. But the 
spring of government hereby loses its elasticity ; the imagina- 
tion grows accustomed to the severe as well as the milder 
punishment ; and as the fear of the latter diminishes, they are 
soon obliged in every case to have recourse to the former. 
Robberies on the highway became common in some countries ; 
in order to remedy this evil, they invented the punishment of 
breaking upon the wheel, the terror of which put a stop for a 
while to this mischievous practice. But soon after robberies 
on the highways became as common as ever. 

Desertion in our days has grown to a very great height ; in 
consequence of which it was Judged proper to punish those de- 
linquents with death ; and yet their number did not diminish. 
The reason is very natural : a soldier accustomed to venture his 
life, despises, or afifects to despise, the danger of losing it. He 
is habituated to the fear of shame ; it would have been therefore 
much better to have continued a punishment f which branded 

c Tt was made by Valerhis Puhlicola d" T,cx Porcia pro terpo civitim lata." 

soon after the expulsion of the kinps, Tt was made in the 454th year of the 

and was twice renewed, both times by foundation of Kome. 

mapistrates of the same family. As r " Nihil ultra quam improbe factum 

Livy observes, lib. X., the question was adiccet." — Liv. 

not to pive it a prrcater force, but to f They slit his nose or cut oflf his ears, 
render its injunctions more perfect. 
" Diligentius sanctum," says Livy, ibid. 



84 MONTESQUIEU 

him with infamy for Hfe ; the penalty was pretended to be in- 
creased, while it really diminished. 

Mankind must not be governed with too much severity ; we 
ought to make a prudent use of the means which nature has 
given us to conduct them. If we inquire into the cause of all 
human corruptions, we shall find that they proceed from the 
impunity of criminals, and not from the moderation of punish- 
ments. 

Let us follow nature, who has given shame to man for his 
scourge; and let the heaviest part of the punishment be the 
infamy attending it. 

But if there be some countries where shame is not a conse- 
quence of punishment, this must be owing to tyranny, which 
has inflicted the same penalties on villains and honest men. 

And if there are others where men are deterred only by 
cruel punishments, we may be sure that this must, in a great 
measure, arise from the violence of the government which has 
used such penalties for slight transgressions. 

It often happens that a legislator, desirous of remedying 
an abuse, thinks of nothing else ; his eyes are open only to this 
object, and shut to its inconveniences. When the abuse is re- 
dressed, you see only the severity of the legislator ; yet there 
remains an evil in the state that has sprung from this severity ; 
the minds of the people are corrupted, and become habituated 
to despotism. 

Lysandersr having obtained a victory over the Athenians, 
the prisoners were ordered to be tried, in consequence of an 
accusation brought against that nation of having thrown all 
the captives of two galleys down a precipice, and of having 
resolved in full assembly to cut ofif the hands of those whom 
they should chance to make prisoners. The Athenians were 
therefore all massacred, except Adymantes, who had opposed 
this decree. Lysander reproached Phylocles, before he was 
put to death, with having depraved the people's minds, and 
given lessons of cruelty to all Greece. 

" The Argives,'* says Plutarch,^* " having put fifteen hundred 
of their citizens to death, the Athenians ordered sacrifices of 

g Xenoph. " Hist." lib. IIL fi Morals of those who are intrusted 

with the direction of the state affairs. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 85 

expiation,! that it might please the gods to turn the hearts of 
the Athenians from so cruel a thought." 

There are two sorts of corruptions — one when the people 
do not observe the laws ; the other when they are corrupted 
by the laws : an incurable evil, because it is in the very remedy 
itself. 

13. — Insufficiency of the Laws of Japan 

Excessive punishments may even corrupt a despotic govern- 
ment ; of this we have an instance in Japan. 

Here almost all crimes are punished with death,/ because 
disobedience to so great an emperor as that of Japan is reck- 
oned an enormous crime. The question is not so much to 
correct the delinquent as to vindicate the authority of the 
prince. These notions are derived from servitude, and are ow- 
ing especially to this, that as the emperor is universal pro- 
prietor, almost all crimes are directly against his interests. 

They punish with death lies spoken before the magistrate ; k 
a proceeding contrary to natural defence. 

Even things which have not the appearance of a crime are 
severely punished ; for instance, a man that ventures his money 
at play is put to death. 

True it is that the character of this people, so amazingly 
obstinate, capricious, and resolute as to defy all dangers and 
calamities, seems to absolve their legislators from the imputa- 
tion of cruelty, notwithstanding the severity of their laws. But 
are men who have a natural contempt for death, and who rip 
open their bellies for the least fancy — are such men, I say, 
mended or deterred, or rather are they not hardened, by the 
continual prospect of punishments ? 

The relations of travellers inform us, with respect to the 
education of the Japanese, that children must be treated there 
with mildness, because they become hardened to punishment ; 
that their slaves must not be too roughly used, because they 
immediately stand upon their defence. Would not one imagine 
that they might easily have judged of the spirit which ought to 

t Montesquieu appears to have fol- j See Kempfcr, 
lowed Amyot, who was mistaken Iicrc. k " Collection of Voyages that con- 
Plutarch says that the Athenians carried tributed to the establishment of the 
the victims of expiation around the as- Kast India Company," torn. iii. p. 4-'8. 
sembly. It was done as an act of puri- 
fication. — Crevier. 



86 MONTESQUIEU 

reign in their political and civil government from that which 
should prevail in their domestic concerns ? 

A wise legislator would have endeavored to reclaim people 
by a just temperature of punishments and rewards ; by maxims 
of philosophy, morality, and religion, adapted to those char- 
acters ; by a proper application of the rules of honor, and by 
the enjoyment of ease and tranquillity of life. And should 
he have entertained any apprehension that their minds, being 
inured to the cruelty of punishments, would no longer be re- 
strained by those of a milder nature, he would have conducted 
himself ' in another manner, and gained his point by degrees ; 
in particular cases that admitted of any indulgence, he would 
have mitigated the punishment, till he should have been able 
to extend this mitigation to all cases. 

But these are springs to which despotic power is a stranger ; 
it may abuse itself, and that is all it can do : in Japan it has 
made its utmost effort, and has surpassed even itself in cruelty. 

As the minds of the people grew wild and intractable, they 
were obliged to have recourse to the most horrid seventy. 

This is the origin, this the spirit, of the laws of Japan. They 
had more fury, however, than force. They succeeded the ex- 
tirpation of Christianity ; but such unaccountable efforts are a 
proof of their insufficiency. They wanted to establish a good 
polity, and they have shown greater marks of their weakness. 

We have only to read the relation of the interview between 
the Emperor and the Deyro at Meaco.w The number of those 
who were suffocated or murdered in that city by ruffians is in- 
credible ; young maids and boys were carried off by force, and 
found afterwards exposed in public places, at unseasonable 
hours, quite naked, and sewn in linen bags, to prevent their 
knowing which way they had passed : robberies were com- 
mitted in all parts ; the bellies of horses were ripped open, to 
bring their riders to the ground ; and coaches were overturned, 
in order to strip the ladies. The Dutch, who were told they 
could not pass the night on the scaffolds without exposing 
themselves to the danger of being assassinated, came down, etc. 

I shall here give one instance more from the same nation. 

/ Let this be observed as a maxim in m " Collection of Voyages that con- 
practice, with reeard to cases where the fributed to the establishment of the 
minds of peup'c 'mve been depraved by East India Company," torn. v. p. 2. 
too great a severity of punishments. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 87 

The Emperor having abandoned himself to infamous pleasures, 
lived unmarried, and was consequently in danger of dying with- 
out issue. The Deyro sent him two beautiful damsels ; one he 
married out of respect, but would not meddle with her. His 
nurse caused the finest women of the empire to be sent for, but 
all to no purpose. At length, an armorer's daughter having 
pleased his fancy," he determined to espouse her, and had a son. 
The ladies belonging to the court, enraged to see a person of 
such mean extraction preferred to themselves, stifled the child. 
The crime was concealed from the Emperor ; for he would have 
deluged the land with blood. The excessive severity of the 
laws hinders, therefore, their execution : when the punishment 
surpasses all measure, they are frequently obliged to prefer im- 
punity to it. 

14. — Of the Spirit of the Roman Senate 

Under the consulate of Acilius Glabrio and Piso, the Asilian 
law was made to prevent the intriguing for places. Dio says P 
that the Senate engaged the Consuls to propose it, by reason 
that C. Cornelius, the Tribune, had resolved to cause more 
severe punishments to be established against this crime ; to 
which the people seemed greatly inclined. The Senate rightly 
judged that immoderate punishments would strike, indeed, a 
terror into people's minds, but must have also this effect, that 
there would be nobody afterwards to accuse or condemn ; 
whereas, by proposing moderate penalties, there would be al- 
ways judges and accusers. 

15. — Of the Roman Lazvs in respect to Punishinents 

I am strongly confirmed in my sentiments upon finding the 
Romans on my side ; and I think that punishments are con- 
nected with the nature of governments when I behold this 
great people changing in this respect their civil laws, in pro- 
portion as they altered their form of government. 

The regal laws, made for fugitives, slaves, and vagabonds, 
were very severe. The spirit of a republic would have required 
that the Decemvirs should not have inserted those laws in their 

«" Collection of VoyaRes that con- fine; they could not be admitted into 

trihuted to the establishment of the the rank of senators, nor nominated to 

East India Company," torn. v. p. 2. any public office.— Dio, book XXXVI. 

« The guilty were condemned to a p Book XXXVI. 



88 MONTESQUIEU 

Twelve Tables ; but men who aimed at tyranny were far from 
conforming to a republican spirit. 

Livy says,o in relation to the punishment of Metius Suffetius, 
dictator of Alba, who was condemned by Tullius Hostilius to 
be fastened to two chariots drawn by horses, and torn asunder, 
that this was the first and last punishment in which the remem- 
brance of humanity seemed to have been lost. He is mistaken ; 
the Twelve Tables are full of very cruel laws.&amp; 

The design of the Decemvirs appears more conspicuous in 
the capital punishment pronounced against libellers and poets. 
This is not agreeable to the genius of a republic, where the peo- 
ple like to see the great men humbled. But persons who aimed 
at the subversion of liberty were afraid of writings that might 
revive its spirit.^ 

After the expulsion of the Decemvirs, almost all the penal 
laws were abolished. It is true they were not expressly re- 
pealed ; but as the Porcian law had ordained that no citizen of 
Rome should be put to death, they were of no further use. 

This is exactly the time to which we may refer what Livy 
says d of the Romans, that no people were ever fonder of 
moderation in punishments. 

But if to the lenity of penal laws we add the right which 
the party accused had of withdrawing before judgment was 
pronounced, we shall find that the Romans followed the spirit 
which I have observed to be natural to a republic. 

Sylla, who confounded tyranny, anarchy, and liberty, made 
the Cornelian laws. He seemed to have contrived regulations 
merely with a view to create new crimes. Thus distinguishing 
an infinite number of actions by the name of murder, he found 
murderers in all parts ; and by a practice too much followed, 
he laid snares, sowed thorns, and opened precipices, whereso- 
ever the citizens set their feet. 

Almost all Sylla's laws contained only the interdiction of fire 
and water. To this Caesar added the confiscation of goods,^ 
because the rich, by preserving their estates in exile, became 
bolder in the perpetration of crimes. 

a Lib. i. pie in augmenting the penal laws 

b We find there the punishment of against satirical writers. 

fire, and generally capital punishments, d I'.ook I. 

theft punished with death, etc. ? " Poenas facinorum auxit, cum locu* 

c Sylla, animated with the same spirit pletes eo facilius scelere se obligarenti 

as the Decemvirs, followed their exam- quod integris patrimoniis cxularent."-* 

Suet, in Jul. Cssare." 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 89 

The emperors, having established a military government, 
soon found that it was as terrible to the prince as to the subject ; 
they endeavored therefore to temper it, and with his view had 
recourse to dignities, and to the respect with which those digni- 
ties were attended. 

The government thus drew nearer a little to monarchy, and 
punishments were divided into three classes ; f those which 
related to the principal persons in the state,g which were very 
mild; those which were inflicted on persons of an inferior 
rank,/i and were more severe ; and, in fine, such as concerned 
only persons of the lowest condition,* which were the most 
rigorous. 

- Maximinus, that fierce and stupid prince, increased the rigor 
of the military government which he ought to have softened. 
The Senate were informed, says Capitolinus,/ that some had 
been crucified, others exposed to wild beasts, or sewn up in the 
skins of beasts lately killed, without any manner of regard to 
their dignity. It seemed as if he wanted to exercise the mili- 
tary discipline, on the model of which he pretended to regulate 
the civil administration. 

In " The Consideration on the Rise and Declension of the 
Roman Grandeur," k we find in what manner Constantine 
changed the military despotism into a military and civil govern- 
ment, and drew nearer to monarchy. There we may trace the 
different revolutions of this state, and see how they fell from 
rigor to indolence, and from indolence to impunity. 

16. — Of the just Proportion hctzveen Pwiishments and Crimes 

It is an essential point, that there should be a certain pro- 
portion in punishments, because it is essential that a great crime 
should be avoided rather than a smaller, and that which is more 
pernicious to society rather than that which Is less. 

" An impostor,^ who called himself Constantine Ducas, 
raised a great Insurrection at Constantinople. He was taken 
and condemned to be whipped; but upon informing against 

f See tlie 3f1 law, sec. tepis ad lep. t Tnfimos. Lep. 5, sec. legis ad leg. 

Cornel. " dc .Sicariis," and a vast num- Cornel. " de Sicariis." 

bar of others in the Digest and in ilie /'Jul Cap.. Maximini duo. 

Codex. h Chap. xvii. 

e Sublimiores. ' " TTistory of Nicephorus. Patriarch 

« Medios. of Constantinople." 



90 MONTESQUIEU 

several persons of distinction, he was sentenced to be burned 
as a calumniator." It is very extraordinary that they should 
thus proportion the punishments between the crime of high 
treason and that of calumny. 

This puts me in mind of a saying of Charles II, King of 
Great Britain. He saw a man one day standing in the pillory; 
upon which he asked what crime the man had committed. He 
was answered, " Please your majesty, he has written a libel 
against your ministers." "The fool!" said the King, "why 
did he not write against me? They would have done nothing 
to him." 

" Seventy persons having conspired against the Emperor 
Basil, he ordered them to be whipped, and the hair of their 
heads and beards to be burned, A stag, one day, having taken 
hold of him by the girdle with his horn, one of his retinue 
drew his sword, cut the girdle, and saved him ; upon which he 
ordered that person's head to be cut off, ' for having,' said he, 
' drawn his sword against his sovereign.' " m Who could im- 
agine that the same prince could ever have passed two such 
different judgments ? 

It is a great abuse amongst us to condemn to the same pun- 
ishment a person that only robs on the highway and another 
who robs and murders. Surely, for the public security, some 
difference should be made in the punishment. 

In China, those who add murder to robbery are cut in 
pieces : n but not so the others ; to this difference it is owing 
that though they rob in that country they never murder. 

In Russia, where the punishment of robbery and murder is 
the same, they always murder.o The dead, say they, tell no 
tales. 

Where there is no difference in the penalty, there should 
be some in the expectation of pardon. In England they never 
murder on the highway, because robbers have some hopes of 
transportation, which is not the case in respect to those that 
commit murder. 

Letters of grace are of excellent use in moderate govern- 
ments. This power which the prince has of pardoning, ex- 
ercised with prudence, is capable of producing admirable ef- 

nt In Nirephorus's history. o " Present State ol Russia," by 

« Du Halde, torn. i. p. 6. Perry. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 9X 

fects. The principle of despotic government, which neither 
grants nor receives any pardon, deprives it of these advantages. 

17. — Of the Rack 

The wickedness of mankind makes it necessary for the law 
to suppose them better than they really are. Hence the depo- 
sition of two witnesses is sufficient in the punishment of all 
crimes. The law believes them, as if they spoke by the mouth 
of truth. Thus we judge that every child conceived in wed- 
lock is legitimate ; the law having a confidence in the mother, 
as if she were chastity itself. But the use of the rack against 
criminals cannot be defended on a like plea of necessity. 

We have before us the example of a nation blessed with an 
excellent civil government,/' where without any inconvenience 
the practice of racking criminals is rejected. It is not, there- 
fore, in its own nature necessary.? 

So many men of learning and genius have written against 
the custom of torturing criminals, that after them I dare not 
presume to meddle with the subject. I was going to say that 
it might suit despotic states, where whatever inspires fear is 
the fittest spring of government. I was going to say that the 
slaves among the Greeks and Romans — but nature cries out 
aloud, and asserts her rights. 

18. — Of pecuniary and corporal Punishments 

Our ancestors, the Germans, admitted of none but pecu- 
niary punishments. Those free and warlike people were of 
opinion that their blood ought not to be spilled but with sword 
in hand. On the contrary, these punishments are rejected by 
the Japanese,'' under pretence that the rich might elude them*. 
But are not the rich afraid of being stripped of their property . 
And might not pecuniary penalties be proportioned to people's 
fortunes? And, in fine, might not infamy be added to those 
punishments? 

P The EnRlish. 'Romans, the 3d and 4th laws, " ad left. 

qThe citizens of Athens could not be Juliam Majest.," show that birth, dig- 
put to the rack (Lysias, " Orat. in Apo- nity, and tlie military profession ex- 
rat.") unless it was for high treason. The empted people from the rack, except in 
torture was used within thirty days af- cases of high treason. See the prudent 
ter condemnation. (Curius Fortiinatus, restrictions of this practice made by the 
"Rhetor. Schol." lib. IT.) There was laws of the Visigoths, 
no preparatory torture, in regard to the r See Kempfer. 



92 MONTESQUIEU 

A good legislator takes a just medium; he ordains neither 
always pecuniary nor always corporal punishments. 

19. — Of the Lazv of Retaliation 

The use of the law of retaliation ^ is very frequent in despotic 
countries, where they are fond of simple laws. Moderate gov- 
ernments admit of it sometimes ; but with this difference, that 
the former exercise it in full rigor, whereas among the latter it 
ever receives some kind of limitation. 

The law of the Twelve Tables admitted two : first, it never 
condemned to retaliation, but when the plaintiff could not be 
satisfied in any other manner.^ Secondly, after condemnation 
they might pay damages and interest," and then the corporal 
was changed into a pecuniary punishment.^ 

20. — Of the Punishment of Fathers for the Crimes of their 

Children 

In China, fathers are punished for the crimes of their chil- 
dren. This was likewise the custom of Peru w — a custom de- 
rived from the notion of despotic power. 

Little does it signify to say that in China the father is 
punished for not having exerted that paternal authority which 
nature has established, and the laws themselves have improved. 
This still supposes that there is no honor among the Chinese. 
Amongst us, parents whose children are condemned by the 
laws of their country, and children x whose parents have under- 
gone the like fate, are as severely punished by shame, as they 
would be in China by the loss of their lives. 

21. — Of the Clemency of the Prince 

Clemency is the characteristic of monarchs. In republics, 
whose principle is virtue, it is not so necessary. In despotic 
governments, where fear predominates, it is less customary, 
because the great men are to be restrained by examples of 

s It is established in the Koran. See w See Garcilaso, " History of the 

the chapter of the Cow. Civil Wars of the Spaniards.' 

/"Si membrum rupit, ni cum eo ;r " Instead of punishing them," says 

pacit, talio esto." — Aulus Gellius, lib. Plato, " they ought to be commended 

XX. cap. i. for not having followed their fathers' ex- 

« Ibid. _ ample." — Book IX. of Laws. 

V See also the law of the Visigoths, 
book VI. tit. iv. sees. 3 and s- 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



93 



severity. It is more necessary in monarchies, where they are 
governed by honor, which frequently requires what the very 
law forbids. Disgrace is here equivalent to chastisement ; and 
even the forms of justice are punishments. This is because 
particular kinds of penalty are formed by shame, which on 
every side invades the delinquent. 

The great men in monarchies are so heavily punished by 
disgrace, by the loss (though often imaginary) of their fortune, 
credit, acquaintances, and pleasures, that rigor in respect to 
them is needless. It can tend only to divest the subject of the 
affection he has for the person of his prince, and of the respect 
he ought to have for public posts and employments. 
' As the instability of the great is natural to a despotic govern- 
ment, so their security is interwoven with the nature of mon- 
archy. 

So many are the advantages which monarchs gain by clem- 
ency, so greatly does it raise their fame and endear them to 
their subjects, that it is generally happy for them to have an 
opportunity of displaying it ; which in this part of the world is 
seldom wanting. 

Some branch, perhaps, of their authority, but never hardly 
the whole, will be disputed ; and if they sometimes fight for 
their crown, they do not fight for their life. 

But some may ask when it is proper to punish, and when to 
pardon. This is a point more easily felt than prescribed. When 
there is danger in the exercise of clemency, it is visible ; noth- 
ing so easy as to distinguish it from that imbecility which ex- 
poses princes to contempt and to the very incapacity of punish- 
ing. 

The Emperor Maurice y made a resolution never to spill 
the blood of his subjects. Anastasius " punished no crimes at 
all. Isaac Angelus took an oath that no one should be put 
to death during his reign. Those Greek emperors forgot that 
it was not for nothing they were intrusted with the sword. 

y Evagr. Hist. c Frag, of Suidas, in Constantine 

Porphyrogenilus. 



BOOK VII 

CONSEQUENCES OF THE DIFFERENT PRINCI- 
PLES OF THE THREE GOVERNMENTS WITH 
RESPECT TO SUMPTUARY LAWS, LUXURY, 
AND THE CONDITION OF WOMEN 

I. — Of Luxury 

LUXURY is ever in proportion to the inequality of for- 
tunes. If the riches of a state are equally divided there 
will be no luxury ; for it is founded merely on the con- 
veniences acquired by the labor of others. 

In order to have this equal distribution of riches, the law 
ought to g-ive to each man only what is necessary for nature. 
If they exceed these bounds, some will spend, and others will 
acquire, by which means an inequality will be established. 

Supposing what is necessary for the support of nature to be 
equal to a given sum, the luxury of those who have only what 
is barely necessary will be equal to a cipher : if a person hap- 
pens to have double that sum, his luxury will be equal to one ; 
he that has double the latter's substance will have a luxury 
equal to three; if this be still doubled, there will be a luxury 
equal to seven ; so that the property of the subsequent individ- 
ual being always supposed double to that of the preceding, the 
luxury will increase double, and a unit be always added, in this 
progression, o, i, 3, 7, 15, 31, 63, 127. 

In Plato's republic,^ luxury might have been exactly calcu- 
lated. There were four sorts of censuses or rates of estates. 
The first was exactly the term beyond poverty, the second was 
double, the third triple, the fourth quadruple to the first. In 
the first census, luxury was equal to a cipher ; in the second to 

fl The first census was the hereditary triple of the hereditary share. See his 
share in land, and Flato wnuld not allow " Laws," book V. 
them to have, in other effects, above a 

94 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 95 

one, in the third to two, in the fourth to three : and thus it fol- 
lowed in an arithmetical proportion. 

Considering the luxury of different nations with respect to 
one another, it is in each state a compound proportion to the 
inequality of fortunes among the subjects, and to the inequality 
of wealth in different states. In Poland, for example, there is 
an extreme inequality of fortunes, but the poverty of the whole 
hinders them from having so much luxury as in a more opulent 
government. 

Luxury is also in proportion to the populousness of the 
towns, and especially of the capital ; so that it is in a compound 
proportion to the riches of the state, to the inequality of private 
fortunes, and to the number of people settled in particular 
places. 

In proportion to the populousness of towns, the inhabitants 
are filled with notions of vanity and actuated by an ambition of 
distinguishing themselves by trifles.^ If they are very numer- 
ous, and most of them strangers to one another, their vanity re- 
doubles, because there are greater hopes of success. As luxury 
inspires these hopes, each man assumes the marks of a superior 
condition. But by endeavoring thus at distinction, every one 
becomes equal, and distinction ceases ; as all are desirous of re- 
spect, nobody is regarded. 

Hence arises a general inconvenience. Those who excel in 
a profession set what value they please on their labor ; this ex- 
ample is followed by people of inferior abilities, and then there 
is an end of all proportion between our wants and the means of 
satisfying them. When I am forced to go to law, I must be able 
to fee counsel ; when I am sick, I must have it in my power to 
fee a physician. 

It is the opinion of several, that the assemblage of so great 
a multitude of people in capital cities is an obstruction to com- 
merce, because the inhabitants are no longer at a proper dis- 
tance from each other. Rut I cannot think so ; for men have 
more desires, more wants, more fancies, when they live to- 
gether. 

h " Tn larfre and populous cities," says they appear to be. — They have the satis- 

the author of the " Fable of the Bees," faction of imagining that they appear 

torn. i. p. 133, " they wear clothes above what they would be: which, to weak 

their rank, and, consequently, have the minds, is a pleasure almost as substan- 

pleasure of being esteemed by a vast tial as they could reap from the very 

majority, not as what they are, but what accomplishment of their wishes." 



96 MONTESQUIEU 



2. — Of sumptuary Lazes in a Democracy 

We have observed that in a repubhc, where riches are equally 
divided, there can be no such thing as hixury ; and as we have 
shown in Book V.,c that this equal distribution constitutes 
the excellence of a republican government ; hence it follows, 
that the less luxury there is in a republic, the more it is perfect. 
There was none among the old Romans, none among the Lace- 
daemonians ; and in republics where this equality is not quite 
lost, the spirit of commerce, industry, and virtue renders every 
man able and willing to live on his own property, and conse- 
quently prevents the growth of luxury. 

The laws concerning the new division of lands, insisted upon 
so eagerly in some republics, were of the most salutary nature. 
They are dangerous, only as they are sudden. By reducing in- 
stantly the wealth of some, and increasing that of others, they 
form a revolution in each family, and must produce a general 
one in the state. 

In proportion as luxury gains ground in a republic, the minds 
of the people are turned towards their particular interests. 
Those who are allowed only what is necessary have nothing 
but their own reputation and their country's glory in view. 
But a soul depraved by luxury has many other desires, and 
soon becomes an enemy to the laws that confine it. The luxury 
in which the garrison of Rhegium d began to live was the cause 
of their massacring the inhabitants. 

No sooner were the Romans corrupted than their desires be- 
came boundless and immense. Of this we may judge by the 
price they set on things. A pitcher of Falernian wine e was 
sold for a hundred Roman denarii ; a barrel of salt meat from 
the kingdom of Pontus cost four hundred ; a good cook four 
talents ; and for beys, no price was reckoned too great. When 
the whole world, impelled by the force of corruption, is im- 
mersed in voluptuousness f what must then become of virtue ? 

c Chaps, iv. and v. dorus, quoted by Constantine Porphyr- 

d The city at the extremity of Italy, ogenitus, in his " Extract of Virtues 

nearest Sicily; pillaged by Decius Jubel- and Vices." 

lius with a barbarian leg;ion. — Ed. / " Cum maximus omnium impetus 

e Fragment of the 36th book of Dio- ad luxuriani esset."— Ibid. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 9; 

3. — Of sumptuary Lazvs in an Aristocracy 

There is this inconvenience in an ill-constituted aristocracy, 
that the wealth centres in the nobility, and yet they are not 
allowed to spend ; for as luxury is contrary to the spirit of mod- 
eration, it must be banished thence. This government conpre- 
hends, therefore, only people who are extremely poor and can- 
not acquire, and people who are vastly rich and cannot spend. 

In Venice, they are compelled by the laws to moderation. 
They are so habituated to parsimony that none but courtesans 
can make them part with their money. Such is the method 
made use of for the support of industry ; the most contemptible 
of women may be profuse without danger, whilst those who 
contribute to their extravagance consume their days in the 
greatest obscurity. 

Admirable in this respect were the institutions of the princi- 
pal republics of Greece. The rich employed their money in 
festivals, musical choruses, chariots, horse-races, and charge- 
able offices. Wealth was, therefore, as burdensome there as 
poverty. 

4. — Of sumptuary Lazvs in a Monarchy 

Tacitus says,g " That the Suiones,/^ a German nation, has a 
particular respect for riches ; for which reason they live under 
the government of one person." This shows that luxury is ex- 
tremely proper for monarchies, and that under this govern- 
ment there must be no sumptuary laws. 

As riches, by the very constitution of monarchies, are un- 
equally divided, there is an absolute necessity for luxury. 
Were the rich not to be lavish, the poor would starve. It is 
even necessary here, that the expenses of the opulent should 
be in proportion to the inequality of fortunes, and that luxury, 
as we have already observed, should increase in this proportion. 
The augmentation of private wealth is owing to its having de- 
prived one part of the citizens of their necessary support ; this 
must therefore be restored to them. 

Hence it is that for the preservation of a monarchical state, 
luxury ought continually to increase, and to grow more exten- 
sive, as it rises from the laborer to the artificer, to the merchant, 

R " De Moribus Germanorum." that part of Europe now known as Swe- 

h The Suioncs were the inliabitants of den.— Ed. 

Vol. T.._7 



98 MONTESQUIEU 

to the magistrate, to the nobihty, to the great officers of state, 
up to the very prince ; otherwise the nation will be undone. 

In the reign of Augustus, a proposal was made in the Roman 
Senate, which was composed of grave magistrates, learned civil- 
ians, and of men whose heads were filled with the notion of the 
primitive times, to reform the manners and luxury of women. 
It is curious to see in Dio,J with what art this prince eluded 
the importunate solicitations of those Senators. This was be- 
cause he was founding a monarchy, and dissolving a republic. 

Under Tiberius, the ^diles proposed in the Senate the re- 
establishment of the ancient sumptuary laws./ This prince, 
who did not want sense, opposed it. " The state," said he, 
" could not possibly subsist in the present situation of things. 
How could Rome, how could the provinces, live? We were 
frugal, while we were only masters of one city ; now we con- 
sume the riches of the whole globe, and employ both the mas- 
ters and their slaves in our service." He plainly saw that 
sumptuary laws would not suit the present form of government. 

When a proposal was made under the same Emperor to the 
Senate to prohibit the governors from carrying their wives with 
them into the provinces, because of the dissoluteness and ir- 
regularity which followed those ladies, the proposal was re- 
jected. It was said, " that the examples of ancient austerity 
had been changed into a more agreeable method of living." k 
They found there was a necessity for different manners. 

Luxury is therefore absolutely necessary in monarchies ; as 
it is also in despotic states. In the former, it is the use of lib- 
erty ; in the latter, it is the abuse of servitude. A slave ap- 
pointed by his master to tyrannize over other wretches of the 
same condition, uncertain of enjoying to-morrow the blessings 
of to-day, has no other felicity than that of glutting the pride, 
the passions, and voluptuousness of the present moment. 

Hence arises a very natural reflection. Republics end with 
luxury ; monarchies with poverty.^ 

i Dio Cassius, lib. lAV. I " Opulentia paritura mox egesta- 

i Tacit. "Annal." lib. III. . tem."— Florus, lib. III. 

k " Multa (luritiei veterum melius et 

Isetius mutata."— Tacit. " Annal." lib. 

III. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 99 



5. — In what Cases sumptuary Laws are useful in a Monarchy 

Whether it was from a repubHcan spirit, or from some other 
particular circumstance, sumptuary laws were made in Aragon, 
in the middle of the thirteenth century. James I ordained that 
neither the king nor any of his subjects should have above two 
sorts of dishes at a meal, and that each dish should be dressed 
only one way, except it were game of their own killing.?" 

In our days, sumptuary laws have been also enacted in Swe- 
den ; but with a different view from those of Aragon. 

A government may make sumptuary laws with a view to 
absolute frvigality; this is the spirit of sumptuary laws m re- 
publics ; and the very nature of the thing shows that such was 
the design of those of Aragon. 

Sumptuary laws may likewise be established with a design 
to promote a relative frugality: when a government, perceiv- 
ing that foreign merchandise, being at too high a price, will re- 
quii e such an exportation of home manufactures as to deprive 
them of more advantages by the loss of the latter than they can 
receive from the possession of the former, they will forbid their 
being introduced. And this is the spirit of the laws which in 
our days have been passed in Sweden." Such are the sumptu- 
ary laws proper for monarchies. 

In general, the poorer a state, the more it is ruined by its 
relative luxury ; and consequently the more occasion it has for 
relative sumptuary laws. The richer a state, the more it thrives 
by its relative luxury ; for which reason it must take particular 
care not to make any relative sumptuary laws. This we shall 
/better explain in the book on commerce ; here we treat only 
of absolute luxury. 

6. — Of the Luxury of China 

Sumptuary laws may, in some governments, be necessary for 
particular reasons. The people, by the influence of the climate, 
may grow so numerous, and the means of subsisting may be 
so uncertain, as to render a universal application to agriculture 
extremely necessary. As luxury in those countries is danger- 

m Constitution of Tames I in tlie year » They have prohibited rich wines and 

1234, article 6, in Marca Hispanica," other costly merchandise. 
p. 14^9- o See book XX. chap. 20. 



loo MONTESQUIEU 

ous, their sumptuary laws should be very severe. In order, 
therefore, to be able to judge whether luxury ought to be en- 
couraged or proscribed, we should examine first what relation 
there is between the number of people and the facility they 
have of procuring subsistence. In England the soil produces 
more grain than is necessary for the maintenance of such as 
cultivate the land and of those who are employed in the 
woollen manufactures. This country may be therefore allowed 
to have some trifling arts and consequently luxury. In France, 
likewise, there is corn enough for the support of the husband- 
man and of the manufacturer. Besides, a foreign trade may 
bring in so many necessaries in return for toys, that there is no 
danger to be apprehended from luxury. 

On the contrary, in China, the women are so prolific, and 
the human species multiplies so fast, that the lands, though 
never so much cultivated, are scarcely sufficient to support the 
inhabitants. Here, therefore, luxury is pernicious, and the 
spirit of industry and economy is as requisite as in any repub- 
lic./' They are obliged to pursue the necessary arts, and to shun 
those of luxury and pleasure. 

This is the spirit of the excellent decrees of the Chinese em- 
perors. " Our ancestors," says an Emperor of the family of the 
Tangs,? " held it as a maxim that if there was a man who did 
not work, or a woman that was idle, somebody must sutler cold 
or hunger in the empire." And on this principle he ordered a 
vast number of the monasteries of bonzes to be destroyed. 

The third emperor of the one-and-twentieth dynasty,'' to 
whom some precious stones were brought that had been found 
in a mine, ordered it to be shut up, not choosing to fatigue his 
people with working for a thing that could neither feed nor 
clothe them. 

" So great is our luxury," says Kiayventi,-^ " that people 
adorn with embroidery the shoes of boys and girls, whom they 
are obliged to sell." Is employing so many people in making 
clothes for one person the way to prevent a great many from 
wanting clothes? There are ten men who eat the fruits of the 

/'Luxury has been here always pro- r History of China, 21st Dynasty, in 

hibited. Father Du Halde's work, tom. i. 

q In an ordinance quoted by Father i In a discourse cited by Father Du 

Du Halde, torn. ii. p. 497. Halde, tom. iii. p. 418. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS loi 

earth to one employed in agriculture ; and is this the means of 
preserving numbers from wanting nourishment ? 

7. — Fatal Consequence of Luxury in China 

In the history of China we find it has had twenty-two suc- 
cessive dynasties ; that is, it has experienced twenty-two gen- 
eral, without mentioning a prodigious number of particular, 
revolutions. The first three dynasties lasted a long time, be- 
cause they were wisely administered, and the empire had not so 
great an extent as it afterwards obtained. But we may observe 
in general that all those dynasties began very well. Virtue, at- 
tention, and vigilance are necessary in China; these prevailed 
in the commencement of the dynasties, and failed in the end. 
It was natural that emperors trained up in military toil, who 
had compassed the dethroning of a family immersed in pleas- 
ure, should adhere to virtue, which they had found so advan- 
tageous, and be afraid of voluptuousness, which they knew had 
proved so fatal to the family dethroned. But after the three or 
four first princes, corruption, luxury, indolence, and pleasure 
possessed their successors ; they shut themselves up in a pal- 
ace ; their understanding was impaired ; their life was short- 
ened ; the family declined ; the grandees rose up ; the eunuchs 
gained credit ; none but children were set on the throne ; the 
palace was at variance with the empire ; a lazy set of people 
that dwelt there ruined the industrious part of the nation ; the 
emperor was killed or destroyed by a usurper, who founded a 
family, the third or fourth successor of which went and shut 
himself up in the very same palace. 

8. — Of public Continency 

So many are the imperfections that attend the loss of virtue 
in women, and so greatly are their minds depraved when this 
principal guard is removed, that in a popular state public in- 
continency may be considered as the last of miseries, and as a 
certain forerunner of a change in the constitution. 

Hence it is that the sage legislators of republican states have 
ever required of women a particular gravity of manners. They 
have proscribed, not only vice, but the very appearance of it. 
They have banished even all commerce of gallantry — a com- 



I02 MONTESQUIEU 

merce that produces idleness, that renders the women cor- 
rupters, even before they are corrupted, that gives a value to 
trifles, and debases things of importance : a commerce, in fine, 
that makes people act entirely by the maxims of ridicule, in 
which the women are so perfectly skilled. 

9. — Of the Condition or State of Women in different 

Governments 

In monarchies women are subject to very little restraint, 
because as the distinction of ranks calls them to court, there 
they assume a spirit of liberty, which is almost the only one 
tolerated in that place. Each courtier avails himself of their 
charms and passions, in order to advance his fortune : and as 
their weakness admits not of pride, but of vanity, luxury con- 
stantly attends them. 

In despotic governments women do not introduce, but are 
themselves an object of, luxury. They must be in a state of 
the most rigorous servitude. Every one follows the spirit of 
the government, and adopts in his own family the customs he 
sees elsewhere established. As the laws are very severe and 
executed on the spot, they are afraid lest the liberty of women 
should expose them to danger. Their quarrels, indiscretions, 
repugnancies, jealousies, piques, and that art, in fine, which 
little souls have of interesting great ones, would be attended 
there with fatal consequences. 

Besides, as princes in those countries make a sport of human 
nature, they allow themselves a multitude of women ; and a 
thousand considerations oblige them to keep those women in 
close confinement. 

In republics women are free by the laws and restrained by 
manners ; luxury is banished thence, and with it corruption 
and vice. 

In the cities of Greece, where they were not under the re- 
straint of a religion which declares that even amongst men 
regularity of manners is a part of virtue ; where a blind passion 
triumphed with a boundless insolence, and love appeared only 
in a shape which we dare not mention, while marriage was con- 
sidered as nothing more than simple friendship ; o such were the 

a " In respect to true love," says p. 600. He spoke in the style of his 
Plutarch, " the women have nothing to time. See Xenophon in the dialogue 
say to it." In his " Treatise of Love," entitled " Hiero." 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



103 



virtue, simplicity, and chastity of women in those cities, that 
in this respect hardly any people were ever known to have had 
a better and wiser polity.^ 

10. — Of the domestic Tribunal among the Romans 

The Romans had no particular magistrates, like the Greeks, 
to inspect the conduct of women. The censors had not an eye 
over them, as over the rest of the republic. 

The institution of the domestic tribunal c supplied the magis- 
tracy established among the Greeks. (^ 

The husband summoned the wife's relatives, and tried her in 
their presence. «* This tribunal preserved the manners of the 
republic ; and at the same time those very manners maintained 
this tribunal. For It decided not only in respect to the viola- 
tion of the laws, but also of manners : now, in order to judge 
of the violation of the latter, manners are requisite. 

The penalties inflicted by this tribunal ought to be, and act- 
ually were, arbitrary : for all that relates to manners, and to the 
rules of modesty, can hardly be comprised under one code of 
laws. It is easy indeed to regulate by laws what we owe to 
others ; but it is very difficult to comprise all we owe to our- 
selves. 

The domestic tribunal inspected the general conduct of 
women : but there was one crime which, beside the animadver- 
sion of this tribunal, was likewise subject to a public accusation. 
This was adultery : whether that in a republic so great a dep- 
ravation of manners interested the government; or whether 
the wife's immorality might render the husband suspected ; or 
whether, in fine, they were afraid lest even honest people might 
choose that this crime should rather be concealed than pun- 
ished. 



b At Athens there was a particular 
mapristrate who inspected the conduct of 
women. 

c Romulus instituted this tribunal, as 
appears from Dionysius Halicarnassus, 
book IT. p. 06, 

d .See in Llvy, book XXXTX., the use 
that was made of this tribunal at the 
lime of the conspiracy of the bac- 
chanalians, (They pave the name of 
conspiracy apainst the republic to as- 
semblies in which the morals of women 
and young people were debauclied ) 



^ It appears from Dionys. Halicarn. 
Tib. II., that Romulus's institution was, 
that in ordinary cases the husband 
should sit as judge in the presence of 
the wife's relatives, but that in heinous 
crimes he should determine in conjunc- 
tion with five of them. Hence LJlpian, 
tit. 6, sees, g, 12, and 13, distinguishes 
in respect to the diflTcrent judgments of 
manners between those whicli he calls 
im|iortant, and those which are less sos 
mores, graviores, leviores. 



I04 



MONTESQUIEU 



II. — In what Manner the Institutions changed at Rome, 
together with the Government 

As manners were supported by the domestic tribunal, they 
were also supported by the public accusation ; and hence it is 
that these two things fell together with the public manners, 
and ended with the republic./^ 

The establishing of perpetual questions, that is, the division 
of jurisdiction among the praetors, and the custom gradually 
introduced of the praetors determining all causes them- 
selves,^ weakened the use of the domestic tribunal. This ap- 
pears by the surprise of historians, who look upon the decisions 
which Tiberius caused to be given by this tribunal as singular 
facts, and as a renewal of the ancient course of pleading. 

The establishment of monarchy and the change of manners 
put likewise an end to public accusations. It might be appre- 
hended lest a dishonest man, affronted at the slight shown him 
by a woman, vexed at her refusal, and irritated even by her 
virtue, should form a design to destroy her. The Julian law 
ordained that a woman should not be accused of adultery till 
after her husband had been charged with favoring her irregu- 
larities ; which limited greatly, and annihilated, as it were, this 
sort of accusation./^ 

Sextus Quintus seemed to have been desirous of reviving 
the public accusation. ^ But there needs very little reflection to 
see that this law would be more improper in such a monarchy 
as his than in any other. 

12. — Of the Guardianship of Women among the Romans 

The Roman laws subjected women to a perpetual guardian- 
ship, except they were under cover and subject to the author- 
ity of a husband./ This guardianship was given to the nearest 
of the male relatives • and by a vulgar expression k Jt appears 
they were very much confined. This was proper for a republic, 
but not at all necessary in a monarchy.^ 



f " Judicio de moribus (quod antea 
quidem in antiquis lesfibus positum erat, 
non autem frequentabatur) penitus abo- 
lito."— Leg. II, " Cod. de repud." 

g Judicia extraordinaria. 

h It was entirely abolished by Con- 
stantine: " It is a shame," said he, 
" that settled marriages shovTld be dis- 
turbed by the presumption of strangers." 



i Sextus Quintus ordained that, if a 
husband did not come and make his 
complaint to him of his wife's infidelity, 
he should be put to death. See Leti. 

;' Nisi convenissent in manum viri. 

k Ne sis mihi patruus oro. 

/ The Papian law ordained, under Au- 
gustus, that women who had borne three 
children should be exempt from this 
tutelage. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



105 



That the women among the ancient Germans were Hkewise 
under a perpetual tutelage appears from the different codes of 
the Laws of the Barbarians."' This custom was communicated 
to the monarchies founded by those people; but was not of long 
duration. 

13. — Of the Punishments decreed by the Emperors against 
the Incontinence of Women 

The Julian law ordained a punishment against adultery. But 
so far was this law, any more than those afterwards made on 
the same account, from being a mark of regularity of manners, 
that on the contrary it was a proof of their depravity. 

The whole political system in respect to women received a 
change in the monarchical state. The question was no longer 
to oblige them to a regularity of manners, but to punish their 
crimes. That new laws were made to punish their crimes was 
owing to their leaving those transgressions unpunished which 
were not of so criminal a nature. 

The frightful dissolution of manners obliged indeed the em- 
perors to enact laws In order to put some stop to lewdness ; but 
it was not their intention to establish a general reformation. 
Of this the positive facts related by historians are a much 
stronger proof than all these laws can be of the contrary. We 
may see in Dio the conduct of Augustus on this occasion, and 
in what manner he eluded, both in his praetorian and censorian 
office, the repeated instances that were made him » for that 
purpose. 

It is true that we find in historians very rigid sentences, passed 
in the reigns of Augustus and Tiberius, against the lewdness of 
some Roman ladies: but by showing us the spirit of those 
reigns, at the same time they demonstrate the spirit of those 
decisions. 

The principal design of Augustus and Tiberius was to pun- 
ish the dissoluteness of their relatives. It was not their im- 



m This tutelage was by the Germans 
called Mundeburdium. 

n Upon their brinpinp before him a 
young man who had married a woman 
with whom he had before carried on an 
illicit commerce, he hesitated a long 
while, not daring to approve or to pun- 
ish these things. At length recollect- 
ing himself, " Seditions." says he, 
*' have been the cause of very great 



evils' let us forget them," Dio, book 
LIV. The Senate having desired him 
to give them some regulations in re- 
spect to women's morals, he evaded 
their petition by telling them that they 
should chastise their wives in the same 
manner as he did his; upon which they 
desired him to tell them how he be- 
haved to his wife. (I think a very in- 
discreet question.) 



/o( 



MONTESQUIEU 



morality they punished, but a particular crime of impiety or 
high treason o of their own invention, which served to promote 
a respect for majesty, and answered their private revenge. 
Hence it is that the Roman historians inveigh so bitterly 
against this tyranny. 

The penalty of the Julian law was small.p The emperors in- 
sisted that in passing sentence the judges should increase the 
penalty of the law. This was the subject of the invectives of 
historians. They did not examine whether the women were 
deserving of punishment, but whether they had violated the 
law, in order to punish them. 

One of the most tyrannical proceedings of Tiberius q was 
the abuse he made of the ancient laws. When he wanted to 
extend the punishment of a Roman lady beyond that inflicted 
by the Julian law, he revived the domestic tribunal.a 

These regulations in respect to women concerned only sena- 
torial families, not the common people. Pretences were wanted 
to accuse the great, which were constantly furnished by the 
dissolute behavior of the ladies. 

In fine, what I have above observed, namely, that regularity 
of manners is not the principle of monarchy, was never better 
verified than under those first emperors ; and whoever doubts 
it need only read Tacitus, Suetonius, Juvenal, or Martial. 



14. — Sumptuary Lazvs among the Romans 

We have spoken of public incontinence because it is the in- 
separable companion of luxury. If we leave the motions of the 
heart at liberty, how shall we be able to restrain the weaknesses 
of the mind? 

At Rome, besides the general institutions, the censors pre- 
vailed on the magistrates to enact several particular laws for 
maintaining the frugality of women. This was the design of 
the Eannian, Licinian, and Oppian laws. We may see in Livy &amp; 



o " Culpam inter viros et fceminas 
vulgatum gravi nomine laesarum re- 
ligionum appellando, clementiam ma- 
jorum suasque ipse leges egrediebatur." 
—Tacit. " Annal." lib. III. 

p This law is given in the Digest, but 
without mentioning the penalty. It is 
supposed it was only relegatio, because 
that of incest was only deportatio. Leg. 
si quis viduam, ff. de quast. 



if " Proprium id Tiberio fuit scelera 
nuper reperta priscis verbis obtegere." — 
Tacit. 

a " Adulterii graviorem pcenam depre- 
catus, ut exemplo majorum propinquis 
suis ultra ducentesimum lapidem re- 
moveretur, siiasit. Adultero Manlio 
Italia atque Africa interdictum est." — 
Tacit. " Annal." lib. II. 

if Dec. 4. lib. IV. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 107 

the great ferment the senate was in when the women insisted 
upon the revocation of the Oppian law. The abrogation of 
this law is fixed upon by Valerius Maximus as the period 
whence we may date the luxury of the Romans. 



15. — Of Dozvrics and Nuptial Advantages in different 

Constitutions 

Dowries ought to be considerable in monarchies, in order 
to enable husbands to support their rank and the established 
luxury. In republics, where luxury should never reign,c they 
ought to be moderate ; but there should be hardly any at all 
jn despotic governments, where women are in some measure 
slaves. 

The community of goods introduced by the French laws be- 
tween man and wife is extremely well adapted to a monarchical 
government; because the women are thereby interested in 
domestic affairs, and compelled, as it were, to take care of their 
family. It is less so in a republic, where women are possessed 
of more virtue. But it would be quite absurd in despotic gov- 
ernments, where the women themselves generally constitute a 
part of the master's property. 

As women are in a state that furnishes sufficient induce- 
ments to marriage, the advantages which the law gives them 
over the husband's property are of no service to society. But 
in a republic they would be extremely prejudicial, because 
riches are productive of luxury. In despotic governments the 
profits accruing from marriage ought to be mere subsistence, 
and no more. 

16. — An excellent Custom of the Sammies 

The Samnites had a custom which in so small a republic, 
and especially in their situation, must have been productive 
of admirable effects. The young people were all convened in 
one place, and their conduct was examined. He that was de- 
clared the best of the whole assembly had leave given him to 
take which girl he pleased for his wife ; the second best chose 

c Marseilles was tlie wisest of all tlic in clothes, as Strabo observes, lib. IV. 
republics in its time; here it was or- Slr.-ibo further allows a small sum in 
dained that dowries should not exceed pold ornaments to serve in the decora- 
one hundred crowns in money, and five lion of a bride. 



io8 MONTESQUIEU 

after him ; and so on.d Admirable institution ! The only rec- 
ommendation that young men could have on this occasion was 
their virtue and the services done their country. He who had 
the greatest share of these endowments chose which girl he 
liked out of the whole nation. Love, beauty, chastity, virtue, 
birth, and even wealth itself, were all, in some measure, the 
dowry of virtue. A nobler and grander recompense, less 
chargeable to a petty state, and more capable of influencing 
both sexes, could scarcely be imagined. 

The Samnites were descended from the Lacedaemonians ; 
and Plato, whose institutes are only an improvement of those 
of Lycurgus, enacted nearly the same law.^ 

17. — Of Female Administration 

It is contrary to reason and nature that women should reign 
in families, as was customary among the Egyptians ; but not 
that they should govern an empire. Li the former case the 
state of their natural weakness does not permit them to have 
the pre-eminence ; in the latter their very weakness generally 
gives them more lenity and moderation, qualifications fitter for 
a good administration than roughness and severity. 

In the Indies they are very easy under a female govern- 
ment ; and it is settled that if the male issue be not of a mother 
of the same blood, the females born of a mother of the blood- 
royal must succeed./^ And then they have a certain number of 
persons who assist them to bear the weight of the govern- 
ment. According to Mr. Smith.g' they are very easy in Africa 
mider female administration. If to this we add the example of 
England and Russia, we shall find that they succeed alike both 
in moderate and despotic governments. 

d Fragment of Nicolaus Damascenus, / " Edifying Letters," 14th collection, 

taken from Stobeeus in the collection of g " Voyage to Guinea," part the sec- 

Constantine Forphyrogenitus. end, of the kingdom of Angola, on the 

e He even permits them to have a Golden Coast. 
mnre frequent interview with one an- 
other. 



CHOICE EXAMPLES OF EARLY PRINTING AND 

ENGRAVING. 

Fac-similes from Rare and Curious Books. 



A PAGE FROM THE MONTE SANTO DI DIO. 

Bettini's Monte Santo di Die was published in Florence in 1477, by Nicholas of 
Breslau, a German, who became by far the most celebrated of Florentine printers. 
This work exhibits the first example of illustrations by means of engraved metal 
plates. The letter-press of the work as shown in this fac-simile is extremely regular 
and effective. 




^M 




^ *^i InconmindaeUlbroIntatuUtottlonteraJK^QcIidioCoinrono 
q I F damefler Antonio da Siena Reuercndiffimo ucfd-&gt;ouo difiJjgno 
ddlacongregationedepouerilefuad .Capitulo .Primo. 

A incrcata €t inmenfa marfla di 
dio/omnipotcntc et inmortale 
crcatorc. bignore ct gouemato 
re dcLluniuerlo plalua ineffabile 
fapicntial&gt;acreato luomo/acao 
d«plo fuo modo/accjuifbndo 
Ct participando ladiiuna iimilitu 
dine/et rilplcndcndo iniui label 
leza ddia luadolciflima cariia • 
ucgl-a iddiopintdicdo6c guili 

— - -. . , .- ■ lo pcraffedo Inde c d^ lulumo 

tt bcatifluno fSic d^dlaritionale crcatura li e di ucdcrc iddiof^cr 
intcUcdo &amp; gufWlo ^affcdo/ct per eflFedo inetcrno goden o % 
(Ognihuomoadunqucporiginal luftitia dcfidcra naturalmcntc 
diuedcrc idio.lmpcro chz. uedcndolo ct cognofccndoloinfinira 
mentc buono foprattide Iccofe 6c intude locofe lamainfinitaine 
^ tc/etlui foloainando6c flucndo c pcrfcdamente 6c in ctcmo bca 

fto. ( E adunque alhoomo dcco per lopeccato nccdlario difapere 
dmodo/ct lauia/ct iaueritapcriequali pofiTa uedcre eflb iddioco 
gnofccrlo 6c amarlo. cEt perd)e cgli e inmlibile ct incomprdxn 
iibilc'/et c cofa fpintuale dibi fogno e d^.dnnanzi atude lecofe fap 
piamo 6cintenajamo quello d^ e neceffario alio fpiritu^al uederg 
Accio diepodamo altamcntcentrarccon tremore/dcuodonect 
reucrentia acontemplare ladiuina maieflade (Et non ecjuefto co 
fa inconucmente adcfiderare Impcro cheirignorediccploproplie 
ta gufhtc bL uedete impero didilgnore e luaue 6c dolce fct cnfto 
dice inmadieo. Siate pfedi fi come e perfedo clpadrccelcffaaLc* 
Come fiperuiene alia uiOonc didio. Capitolo fecondo. 
^|T Rccofe fono neceflarie aucderc iddio. LalufEdcntia dduc 
*-^' jI v^tore Ladifpofitione dcflb idio c^uale Uiuomo defidcra 



BOOK VIII 

OF THE CORRUPTION OF THE PRINCIPLES OF 
THE THREE GOVERNMENTS 



T 



I. — General Idea of this Book 

HE corruption of every government generally begins 
with that of its principles. 



2. — Of the Corruption of the Principles of Democracy. 

The principle of democracy is corrupted not only when the 
spirit of equality is extinct, but Hkewise when they fall into a 
spirit of extreme equality, and when each citizen would fain 
be upon a level with those whom he has chosen to command 
him. Then the people, incapable of bearing the very power 
they have delegated, want to manage everything themselves, 
to debate for the senate, to execute for the magistrate, and to 
decide for the judges. 

When this is the case, virtue can no longer subsist in the 
republic. The people are desirous of exercising the functions 
of the magistrates, who cease to be revered. The deliberations 
of the senate are slighted ; all respect is then laid aside for the 
senators, and consequently for old age. If there is no more re- 
spect for old age, there will be none presently for parents ; 
deference to husbands will be likewise thrown off, and submis- 
sion to masters. This license will soon become general, and 
the trouble of command be as fatiguing as that of obedience. 
Wives, children, slaves will shake off all subjection. No longer 
will there be any such thing as manners, order, or virtue. 

We find in Xenophon's Banquet a very lively description of 
a republic in which the people abused their equality. Each 
guest gives in his turn the reason why he is satisfied. " Con- 
tent I am," says Chamides, " because of my poverty. When I 

log 



no MONTESQUIEU 

was rich, I was obliged to pay my court to informers, knowing 
I was more liable to be hurt by them than capable of doing 
them harm. The republic constantly demanded some new tax 
of me ; and I could not decline paying. Since I have grown 
poor, I have acquired authority; nobody threatens me; I 
rather threaten others. I can go or stay where I please. The 
rich already rise from their seats and give me the way. I am 
a king, I was before a slave : I paid taxes to the republic, now 
it maintains me: I am no longer afraid of losing; but I hope 
to acquire." 

The people fall into this misfortune, when those in whom 
they confide, desirous of concealing their own corruption, en- 
deavor to corrupt them. To disguise their own ambition, they 
speak to them only of the grandeur of the state ; to conceal their 
own avarice, they incessantly flatter theirs. 

The corruption will increase among the corruptors, and like- 
wise among those who are already corrupted. The people will 
divide the public money among themselves, and, having added 
the administration of affairs to their indolence, will be for 
blending their poverty with the amusements of luxury. But 
with their indolence and luxury, nothing but the public treasure 
will be able to satisfy their demands. 

We must not be surprised to see their suffrages given for 
money. It is impossible to make great largesses to the peo- 
ple without great extortion : and to compass this, the state must 
be subverted. The greater the advantages they seem to derive 
from their liberty, the nearer they approach towards the crit- 
ical moment of losing it. Petty tyrants arise who have all the 
vices of a single tyrant. The small remains of liberty soon be- 
come insupportable ; a single tyrant starts up, and the people 
are stripped of every thing, even of the profits of their corrup- 
tion. 

Democracy has, therefore, two excesses to avoid — the spirit 
of inequality, which leads to aristocracy or monarchy, and the 
spirit of extreme equality, which leads to despotic power, as the 
latter is completed by conquest. 

True it is, that those who corrupted the Greek republics did 
not always become tyrants. This was because they had a 
greater passion for eloquence than for the military art. Be- 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS iii 

sides there reigned an implacable hatred in the breasts of the 
Greeks against those who subverted a republican government ; 
and for this reason anarchy degenerated into annihilation, in- 
stead of being changed into tyranny. 

But Syracuse being situated in the midst of a great number 
of petty states, whose government had been changed from 
oligarchy to tyranny ,a and being governed by a senate b scarce- 
ly ever mentioned in history, underwent such miseries as are 
the consequence of a more than ordinary corruption. This city, 
ever a prey to licentiousness,c or oppression, equally laboring 
under the sudden and alternate succession of liberty and servi- 
tude, and notwithstanding her external strength, constantly 
determined to a revolution by the least foreign power — this 
city, I say, had in her bosom an immense multitude of people, 
whose fate it was to have always this cruel alternative, either 
of choosing a tyrant to govern them, or of acting the tyrant 
themselves. 

3. — Of the Spirit of extreme Equality 

As distant as heaven is from earth, so is the true spirit of 
equality from that of extreme equality. The former does not 
imply that everybody should command, or that no one should 
be commanded, but that we obey or command our equals. It 
endeavors not to shake off the authority of a master, but that 
its masters should be none but its equals. 

In the state of nature, indeed, all men are born equal, but 
they cannot continue in this equality. Society makes them 
lose it, and they recover it only by the protection of the laws. 

Such is the difference between a well-regulated democracy 
and one that is not so, that in the former men are equal only 
as citizens, but in the latter they are equal also as magistrates, 
as senators, as judges, as fathers, as husbands, or as masters. 

The natural place of virtue is near to liberty; but it is not 
nearer to excessive liberty than to servitude. 

a See Plutarch in the lives of Timoleon The people havtnj? been the cause of the 

and Dio. victory over the Athenians, the republic 

frit was that of the Six hundred, of was changed. — Ibid. cap. iv. The pas- 

whom mention is made by Diodorus. sion of two young magistrates, one of 

c Upon the expulsion of the tyrants, whom carried off tne other's boy, and in 

they made citizens of strangers and mer- revenRC the other debauched his wife, 

cenary troops, which Rave rise to civil was attended with a change in the form 

wars.— Aristot. " Polit." lib. V. cap. iii. of this republic— Ibid. lib. VII. cap. iv. 



112 MONTESQUIEU 

4. — Particular Cause of the Corruption of the People 

Great success, especially when chiefly owing to the people^ 
intoxicates them to such a degree that it is impossible to con- 
tain them within bounds. Jealous of their magistrates, they 
soon become jealous likewise of the magistracy ; enemies to 
those who govern, they soon prove enemies also to the consti- 
tution. Thus it was that the victory over the Persians in the 
straits of Salamis corrupted the republic of Athens ;d and thus 
the defeat of the Athenians ruined the republic of Syracuse.^ 

Marseilles never experienced those great transitions from 
lowness to grandeur ; this was owing to the prudent conduct 
of that republic, which always preserved her principles. 

1 

5. — Of the Corruption of the Principle of Aristocracy 

Aristocracy is corrupted if the power of the nobles becomes 
arbitrary : when this is the case, there can no longer be any 
virtue either in the governors or the governed. 

If the reigning families observe the laws, it is a monarchy 
with several monarchs, and in its own nature one of the most 
excellent ; for almost all these monarchs are tied down by the 
laws. But when they do not observe them, it is a despotic state 
swayed by a great many despotic princes. 

In the latter case, the republic consists only in the nobles. 
The body governing is the republic ; and the body governed 
is the despotic state ; which forms two of the most heteroge- 
neous bodies in the world. 

The extremity of corruption is when the power of the nobles 
becomes hereditary ;f for then they can hardly have any mod- 
eration. If they are only a few, their power is greater, but their 
security less : if they are a larger number, their power is less, 
and their security greater, insomuch that power goes on in- 
creasing, and security diminishing, up to the very despotic 
prince who is encircled with excess of power and danger. 

The great number, therefore, of nobles in an hereditary aris- 
tocracy renders the government less violent: but as there is 
less virtue, they fall into a spirit of supineness and negligence, 
by which the state loses all its strength and activity .g 

d Aristot. " Polit." lib. V. cap. iv. g Venice is one of those republics 

e Ibid. _ that has enacted the best laws for cor- 

f The aristocracy is changed into an recting the inconveniences of an heredi- 

oligarchy. tary aristocracy. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 113 

An aristocracy may maintain the full vigor of its constitution 
if the laws be such as are apt to render the nobles more sen- 
sible of the perils and fatigues than of the pleasure of command ; 
and if the government be in such a situation as to have some- 
thing to dread, while security shelters under its protection, 
and uncertainty threatens from abroad. 

As a certain kind of confidence forms the glory and stability 
of monarchies, republics, on the contrary, must have some- 
thing to apprehend./f A fear of the Persians supported the laws 
of Greece. Carthage and Rome were alarmed, and strength- 
ened by each other. Strange, that the greater security those 
states enjoyed, the more, like stagnated waters, they were sub- 
ject to corruption ! 

6. — Of the Corruption of the Principle of Monarchy 

As democracies are subverted when the people despoil the 
senate, the magistrates, the judges of their functions, so mon- 
archies are corrupted when the prince insensibly deprives so- 
cieties or cities of their privileges. In the former case the mul- 
titude usurp the power, in the latter it is usurped by a single 
person. 

" The destruction of the dynasties of Tsin and Soui," says a 
Chinese author, " was owing to this : the princes, instead of 
confining themselves, like their ancestors, to a general inspec- 
tion, the only one worthy of a sovereign, wanted to govern 
every thing immediately by themselves." i 

The Chinese author gives us in this instance the cause of the 
corruption of almost all monarchies. 

Monarchy is destroyed when a prince thinks he shows a 
greater exertion of power in changing than in conforming to 
the order of things ; when he deprives some of his subjects of 
their hereditary employments to bestow them arbitrarily upon 
others ; and when he is fonder of being guided by fancy than 
judgment. 

Again, it is destroyed when the prince, directing everything 
entirely to himself, calls to the state his capital, the capital to 
his court, and the court to his own person. 

h Justin attributes the extinction^ of tes. Tlien it wns tlint tlie Macedonians 

Atlienian virtue to the death of Epa- emerped froui obscurity, 1. 6. 

minondas. Having no further cmula- t Compilation of works made under 

tion, they spent tlicir revenues in feasts, the Mings, related by Father Du Ilalde. 
frcquentius cfcnam, quam castra viscn- 

Voi.. T.— 8 



114 



MONTESQUIEU 



It is destroyed, in fine, when the prince mistakes his au- 
thority, his situation and the love of his people, and when he is 
not fully pursuaded that a monarch ought to think himself se- 
cure, as a despotic prince ought to think himself in danger. 

7. — The same Subject continued 

The principle of monarchy is corrupted when the first dig- 
nities are marks of the first servitude, when the great men are 
deprived of public respect, and rendered the low tools of ar- 
bitrary power. 

It is still more corrupted when honor is set up in contradic- 
tion to honors, and when men are capable of being loaded at 
the very same time with infamy ; and with dignities. 

It is corrupted when the prince changes his justice into se- 
verity ; when he puts, like the Roman emperors, a Medusa's 
head on his breast ;^' and when he assumes that menacing and 
terrible air which Commodus ordered to be given to his stat- 
ues.^ 

Again, it is corrupted when mean and abject souls grow 
vain of the pomp attending their servitude, and imagine that 
the motive which induces them to be entirely devoted to their 
prince exempts them from all duty to their country. 

But if it be true (and, indeed, the experience of all ages has 
shown it) that in proportion as the power of the monarch be- 
comes boundless and immense, his security diminishes, is the 
corrupting of this power, and the altering of its very nature, 
a less crime than that of high treason against the prince ? 



8. — Danger of the Corruption of the Principle of monarchical 

Government 

The danger is not when the state passes from one moderate 
to another moderate government, as from a republic to a mon- 



; During the reign of Tiberius statues 
were erected to, and triumphal orna- 
ments conferred on, informers; which 
debased these honors to such a degree, 
that those who had really merited them 
disdained to accept them. Frag, of Dio, 
book LV'III., taken from the Extract 
of Virtues and Vices, by Constantine 
Porphyrogenitus. See in Tacitus in 
what manner Nero, on the discovery 
and punishment of a pretended con- 
spiracy, bestowed triumphal ornaments 



on Petronius Turpilianus, Nerva, and 
Tigellinus.— " Annal." book XIV. See 
likewise how the generals refused to 
serve, because they condemned the 
military honors: pervulgatis triumphi 
insignibus. — Tacit. " Annal." book 
XIIT. 

k In this state the prince knew ex- 
tremely well the principle of his gov- 
ernment. 

I Herodian. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 115 

archy, or from a monarchy to a republic ; but when it is pre- 
cipitated from a moderate to a despotic government. 

Most of the European nations are still governed by the prin- 
ciples of morality. But if from a long abuse of power or the 
fury of conquest, despotic sway should prevail to a certain 
degree, neither morals nor climate would be able to withstand 
its baleful influence: and then human nature would be ex- 
posed, for some time at least, even in this beautiful part of the 
world, to the insults with which she has been abused in the 
other three. 

9. — How ready the Nobility are to defend the Throne 

'The English nobility buried themselves with Charles the 
First under the ruins of the throne ; and before that time, when 
Philip II endeavored to tempt the French with the allurement 
of liberty, the crown was constantly supported by a nobility 
who think it an honor to obey a king, but consider it as the 
lowest disgrace to share the power with the people. 

The house of Austria has ever used her endeavors to op- 
press the Hungarian nobility ; little thinking how serviceable 
that very nobility would be one day to her. She would fain 
have drained their country of money, of which they had no 
plenty ; but took no notice of the men, with whom it abounded. 
When princes combined to dismember her dominions, the sev- 
eral parts of that monarchy fell motionless, as it were one upon 
another. No life was then to be seen but in those very nobles, 
who, resenting the afifronts ofifered to the sovereign, and for- 
getting the injuries done to themselves, took up arms to avenge 
her cause, and considered it the highest glory bravely to die 
and to forgive. 



fe' 



10. — Of the Corruption of the Principle of despotic 

Government 

The principle of despotic government is subject to a con- 
tinual corruption, because it is even in its nature corrupt. 
Other governments are destroyed by particular accidents, 
which do violence to the principles of each constitution ; this 
is ruined by its own intrinsic imperfections, when some acci- 
dental causes do not prevent the corrupting of its principles. 
It maintains itself, therefore, only when circumstances, drawn 



ii6 MONTESQUIEU 

from the climate, religion, situation, or genius of the people, 
oblige it to conform to order, and to admit of some rule. By 
these things its nature is forced without being changed ; its 
ferocity remains ; and it is made tame and tractable only for a 
time. 

II. — Natural Effects of the Goodness and Corruption of the 
Principles of Government 

When once the principles of government are corrupted, the 
very best laws become bad, and turn against the state : but 
when the principles are sound, even bad laws have the same 
effect as good ; the force of the principle draws everything 
to it. 

The inhabitants of Crete used a very singular method to 
keep the principal magistrates dependent on the laws, which 
was that of " Insurrection." Part of the citizens rose up in 
arms,w put the magistrates to flight, and obliged them to return 
to a private life. This was supposed to be done in consequence 
of the law. One would have imagined that an institution of 
this nature, which established sedition to hinder the abuse of 
power, would have subverted any republic whatsoever ; and yet 
it did not subvert that of Crete. The reason is this.« 

When the ancients would cite a people that had the strong- 
est affection for their country, they were sure to mention the 
inhabitants of Crete : " Our Country," said Plato,o " a name so 
dear to the Cretans." They called it by a name which signifies 
the love of a mother for her children.o Now the love of our 
country sets everything right. 

The laws of Poland have likewise their Insurrection : but 
the inconveniences thence arising plainly show that the people 
of Crete alone were capable of using such a remedy with suc- 
cess. 

The gymnic exercises established among the Greeks had the 
same dependence on the goodness of the principle of govern- 
ment. " It was the Lacedaemonians and Cretans," said Plato,^ 
" that opened those celebrated academies which gave them so 
eminent a rank in the world. Modesty at first was alarmed ; 

m Aristot. " Polit." book II. chap. lo. o " Repub." lib. IX. 

n They always united immediately a Plutarch's "Morals," treatise 

against foreign enemies, which was " whether a man advanced in years 

called " Syncretism."— Plut. " Mor." p. ought to meddle with public affairs." 

88. b " Repub." lib. V. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



117 



but it yielded to the public utility." In Plato's time these insti- 
tutions were admirable :c as they bore a relation to a very im- 
portant object, which was the military art. But when virtue 
fled from Greece, the military art was destroyed by these insti- 
tutions ; people appeared then on the arena, not for improve- 
ment, but for debauch.fi 

Plutarch informs use that the Romans in his time were of 
opinion that those games had been the principal cause of the 
slavery into which the Greeks had fallen. On the contrary, it 
was the slavery of the Greeks that corrupted those exercises. 
In Plutarch's time,^ their fighting naked in the parks, and their 
wrestling, infected the young people with a spirit of cowardice, 
inclined them to infamous passions, and made them mere dan- 
cers. But under Epaminondas the exercise of wrestling made 
the Thebans win the famous battle of Leuctra.g 

There are very few laws which are not good, while the state 
retains its principles : here I may apply what Epicurus said of 
riches. " It is not the liquor, but the vessel that is corrupted." 

12. — The same Subject continued 

In Rome the judges were chosen at first from the order of 
senators. This privilege the Gracchi transferred to the knights ; 
Drusus gave it to the senators and knights ; Sylla to the sena- 
tors only : Cotta to the senators, knights, and public treas- 
urers ; Caesar excluded the latter ; Antony made decuries of 
senators, knights, and centurions. 

When once a republic is corrupted, there is no possibility of 
remedying any of the growing evils, but by removing the cor- 
ruption and restoring its lost principles ; every other correction 
is either useless or a new evil. While Rome preserved her 
principles entire, the judicial power might without any abuse 
be lodged in the hands of senators ; but as soon as this city be- 
came corrupt, to whatsoever body that power was transferred. 



c Tht lymnic art was divided into 
two parts, dancing and wrestling. In 
Crete they had the armed dances of the 
Curetes; at Sparta they had those of 
Castor and Pollux; at Athens the armed 
dances of Pallas, which were extremely 
proper for those that were not yet of 
ape for military service. " Wrestling is 
the imace of war," said Plato (" Laws," 
hriok VI r.). He commends antiquity 
for having established only two dances, 



the pacific and the Pyrrhic. See how 
the latter dance was applied to the mili- 
tary art, Plato, ibid. 

d " Aut libidinosse." 

Ladxas Lacedremonis pala'stras." 
—Mart. lib. IV. ep. 55. 

e Plutarch's " Morals," in the treatise 
entitled " Questions concerning the af- 
fairs of the Romans." 

f Thid. 

g Ibid., Table propositions, book II, 



ii8 MONTESQUIEU 

whether to the senate, to the knights, to the treasurers, to two 
of those bodies, to all three together, or to any other, matters 
still went wrong. The knights had no more virtue than the 
senate, the treasurers no more than the knights, and these as 
little as the centurions. 

After the people of Rome had obtained the privilege of shar- 
ing the magistracy with the patricians, it was natural to think 
that their flatterers would immediately become arbiters of the 
government. But no such thing ever happened. — It was ob- 
servable that the very people who had rendered the plebeians 
capable of public offices ever fixed their choice upon the patri- 
cians. Because they were virtuous, they were magnanimous ; 
and because they were free, they had a contempt of power. But 
when their morals were corrupted, the more power they were 
possessed of, the less prudent was their conduct, till at length, 
upon becoming their own tyrants and slaves, they lost the 
strength of liberty to fall into the weakness and impotency of 
licentiousness. 

13. — The effect of an Oath among virtuous People 

There is no nation, says Livy,/f that has been longer uncor- 
rupted than the Romans ; no nation where moderation and 
poverty have been longer respected. 

Such was the influence of an oath among those people, that 
nothing bound them more strongly to the laws. They often 
did more for the observance of an oath than they would ever 
have performed for the thirst of glory or for the love of their 
country. 

When Quintus Cincinnatus the consul wanted to raise an 
army in the city against the ^Equi and the Volsci, the tribunes 
opposed him. " Well," said he, " let all those who have taken 
an oath to the consul of the preceding year march under my 
banner." i In vain did the tribunes cry out that this oath was 
no longer binding, and that when they took it Quintus was but 
a private person: the people were more religious than those 
who pretended to direct them ; they would not listen to the 
distinctions or equivocations of the tribunes. 

When the same people thought of retiring to the Sacred 
Mount, they felt some remorse from the oath they had taken 

h Book I. « " Livy," book III. 20. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



119 



to the consuls, that they would follow them into the field./ 
They entered then into a design of killing the consuls ; but 
dropped it when they were given to understand that their 
oath would still be binding. Now it is easy to judge of the no- 
tion they entertained of the violation of an oath from the crime 
they intended to commit. 

After the battle of Cannae, the people were seized with such 
a panic that they would fain have retired to Sicily ./^ But Scipio 
having prevailed upon them to swear they would not stir from 
Rome, the fear of violating this oath surpassed all other appre- 
hensions. Rome was a ship held by two anchors, religion and 
morality, in the midst of a furious tempest. 

114. — How the smallest Change of the Constitution is attended 
zvith the Ruin of its Principles 

Aristotle mentions the city of Carthage as a well-regulated 
republic. Polybius tells us^ that there was this inconvenience 
at Carthage in the second Punic war, that the senate had lost 
almost all its authority. We are informed by Livy that when 
Hannibal returned to Carthage he found that the magistrates 
and the principal citizens had abused their power, and con- 
verted the public revenues to their private emolument. The 
virtue, therefore, of the magistrates, and the authority of the 
senate, both fell at the same time ; and all was owing to the 
same cause. 

Every one knows the wonderful effects of the censorship 
among the Romans. There was a time when it grew burden- 
some ; but still it was supported because there was more luxury 
than corruption. Claudius"? weakened its authority, by which 
means the corruption became greater than the luxury, and the 
censorship dwindled away of itself.^ After various interrup- 
tions and resumptions, it was entirely laid aside, till it became 
altogether useless — that is, till the reigns of Augustus and 
Claudius. 

y " IJvy," book IIT. «i See Ijook XT. chap. xii. 

k " The people here referred to were ti See " Dio," book XXXVII. 

several youriK officers, who, in despair, Cicero's life in Plutarch, Cicero to 

proposed to retire, but were restrained Atticus, book IV. letters 10 and 15. 

by Scipio."— Crcvier. Asconius on Cicero, de divinatlone, 

/About a hundred years after. 



I20 MONTESQUIEU 

15. — Sure Methods of preserving the three Principles 

I shall not be able to make myself rightly understood till 
the reader has perused the four following chapters. 

16. — Distinctive Properties of a Republic 

It is natural for a republic to have only a small territory ; 
otherwise it cannot long subsist. In an extensive republic 
there are men of large fortunes, and consequently of less 
moderation ; there are trusts too considerable to be placed in 
any single subject ; he has interests of his own ; he soon begins 
to think that he may be happy and glorious, by oppressing his 
fellow-citizens ; and that he may raise himself to grandeur on 
the ruins of his country. 

In an extensive republic the public good is sacrificed to a 
thousand private views ; it is subordinate to exceptions, and 
depends on accidents. In a small one, the interest of the pub- 
lic is more obvious, better understood, and more within the 
reach of every citizen ; abuses have less extent, and, of course, 
are less protected. 

The long duration of the republic of Sparta was owing to her 
having continued in the same extent of territory after all her 
wars. The sole aim of Sparta was liberty ; and the sole ad- 
vantage of her liberty, glory. 

It was the spirit of the Greek republics to be as contented 
with their territories as with their laws. Athens was first fired 
with ambition and gave it to Lacedsemon ; but it was an ambi- 
tion rather of commanding a free people than of governing 
slaves ; rather of directing than of breaking the union. All 
was lost upon the starting up of monarchy — a government 
whose spirit is more turned to increase of dominion. 

Excepting particular circumstances,^ it is difficult for any 
other than a republican government to subsist longer in a single 
town. A prince of so petty a state would naturally endeavor 
to oppress his subjects, because his power would be great, 
while the means of enjoying it or of causing it to be respected 
would be inconsiderable. The consequence is, lie would tram- 
ple upon his people. On the other hand, such a prince might 

o As when a petty sovereign supports means of their mutvial jealousy; but 
himself between two great powers by then he has only a precarious existence. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 121 

be easily crushed by a foreign or even a domestic force ; the 
people might any instant unite and rise up against him. Now 
as soon as the sovereign of a single town is expelled, the quarrel 
is over ; but if he has many towns, it only begins. 

17. — Distinct he Properties of a Monarchy 

A monarchical state ought to be of moderate extent. Were 
it small, it would form itself into a republic; were it very 
large, the nobility, possessed of great estates, far from the eye 
of the prince, with a private court of their own, and secure, 
moreover, from sudden executions by the laws and manners 
of^the country — such a nobility, I say, might throw ofif their 
allegiance, having nothing to fear from too slow and too dis- 
tant a punishment. 

Thus Charlemagne had scarcely founded his empire when he 
was obliged to divide it ; whether the governors of the prov- 
inces refused to obey ; or whether, in order to keep them more 
under subjection, there was a necessity of parcelling the empire 
into several kingdoms. 

After the decease of Alexander his empire was divided. How 
was it possible for those Greek and Macedonian chiefs, who 
were each of them free and independent, or commanders at 
least of the victorious bands dispersed throughout that vast ex- 
tent of conquered land — how was it possible, I say, for them to 
obey? 

Attila's empire was dissolved soon after his death ; such a 
number of kings, who were no longer under restraint, could 
not resume their fetters. 

The sudden establishment of unlimited power is a remedy 
which in those cases may prevent a dissolution : but how dread- 
ful the remedy, which after the enlargement of dominion opens 
a new scene of misery ! 

The rivers hasten to mingle their waters with the sea ; and 
monarchies lose themselves in despotic power. 

18. — Particular Case of the Spanish Monarchy 

Let not the example of Spain be produced against me ; it 
rather proves what I affirm. To preserve America she did 
what even despotic power itself does not attempt: she de- 



122 MONTESQUIEU 

stroyed the inhabitants. To preserve her colony, she was 
obhged to keep it dependent even for its subsistence. 

In the Netherlands, she essayed to render herself arbitrary ; 
and as soon as she abandoned the attempt, her perplexity in- 
creased. On the one hand the Walloons would not be governed 
by Spaniards ; and on the other, the Spanish soldiers refused 
to submit to Walloon officers./' 

In Italy she maintained her ground, merely by exhausting 
herself and by enriching that country. For those who would 
have been pleased to have got rid of the King of Spain were 
not in a humor to refuse his gold. 

19. — Distinctive Properties of a despotic Government 

A large empire supposes a despotic authority in the person 
who governs. It is necessary that the quickness of the prince's 
resolutions should supply the distance of the places they are 
sent to ; that fear should prevent the remissness of the distant 
governor or magistrate; that the law should be derived from 
a single person, and should shift continually, according to the 
accidents which incessantly multiply in a state in proportion 
to its extent. 

20. — Consequence of tJie preceding Chapters 

If it be, therefore, the natural property of small states to be 
governed as a republic, of middling ones to be subject to a 
monarch, and of large empires to be swayed by a despotic 
prince ; the consequence is, that in order to preserve the prin- 
ciples of the established government, the state must be sup- 
ported in the extent it has acquired, and that the spirit of this 
state will alter in proportion as it contracts or extends its 

limits. 

21. — Of the Empire of China 

Before I conclude this book, I shall answer an objection 
that may be made to the foregoing doctrine. 

Our missionaries inform us that the government of the vast 
Empire of China is admirable, and that it has a proper mixture 
of fear, honor, and virtue. Consequently I must have given 
an idle distinction in establishing the principles of the three 
governments. 

p See the " History of the United Provinces," by M. Le Clerc. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



123 



But I cannot conceive what this honor can be among a peo- 
ple who act only through fear of being bastinadoed.? 

Again, our merchants are far from giving us any such ac- 
counts of the virtue so much talked of by the missionaries ; we 
need only consult them in relation to the robberies and ex- 
tortions of the mandarins.'' I likewise appeal to another un- 
exceptionable witness, the great Lord Anson. 

Besides, Father Perennin's letters concerning the emperor's 
proceedings against some of the princes of the bloods who had 
incurred his displeasure by their conversion, plainly show us a 
settled plan of tyranny, and barbarities committed by rule, 
that is, in cold blood. 

We have likewise Monsieur de Mairan's, and the same 
Father Perennin's, letters on the government of China. I find, 
therefore, that after a few proper questions and answers the 
whole mystery is unfolded. 

Might not our missionaries have been deceived by an appear- 
ance of order? Might not they have been struck with that con- 
stant exercise of a single person's will — an exercise by which 
they themselves are governed, and which they are so pleased 
to find in the courts of the Indian princes ; because as they go 
thither only in order to introduce great changes, it is much 
easier to persuade those princes that there are no bounds to 
their power, than to convince the people that there are none to 
their submission.^ 

In fine, there is frequently some kind of truth even in errors 
themselves. It may be owing to particular and, perhaps, very 
extraordinary circumstances that the Chinese government is 
not so corrupt as one might naturally expect. The climate and 
some other physical causes may, in that country, have had so 
strong an influence on their morals as in some measure to pro- 
duce wonders. 

The climate of China is surprisingly favorable to the propa- 
gation of the human species." The women are the most pro- 
lific in the whole world. The most barbarous tyranny can put 
no stop to the progress of propagation. The prince cannot say 

q" It is the cudpel that governs missionaries availed themselves of the 

China," says Father Dii TIalde. _ atilhority of Canhi to silence the man- 

r Amontj others, Do T.anRc's relation. darins, who constantly declared that by 

5 Of the family of Soiirmama, " Edi- the laws of the country no foreign wor- 

fying Letters," iSth cnllcrtion. ship could be established in the empire. 

t See in Father Du Halde how the « See " Lettres Persanes," cxx, 



124 MONTESQUIEU 

there like Pharoah, " Let us deal wisely with them, lest they 
multiply." He would be rather reduced to Nero's wish, that 
mankind had all but one head. In spite of tyranny, China by 
the force of its climate will be ever populous, and triumph over 
the tyrannical oppressor. 

China, like all other countries that live chiefly upon rice, is 
subject to frequent famines. When the people are ready to 
starve, they disperse in order to seek for nourishment ; in 
consequence of which, gangs of robbers are formed on every 
side. Most of them are extirpated in their very infancy ; others 
swell, and are likewise suppressed. And yet in so great a num- 
ber of such distant provinces, some band or other may happen 
to meet with success. In that case they maintain their ground, 
strengthen their party, form themselves into a military body, 
march up to the capital, and place their leader on the throne. 

From the very nature of things, a bad administration is here 
immediately punished. The want of subsistence in so popu- 
lous a country produces sudden disorders. The reason why 
the redress of abuses in other countries is attended with such 
difficulty is, because their efforts are not immediately felt ; the 
prince is not informed in so sudden and sensible a manner as 
in China. 

The Emperor of China is not taught like our princes, that 
if he governs ill he will be less happy in the other life, less 
powerful and less opulent in this. He knows that if his gov- 
ernment be not just he will be stripped both of empire and life. 

As China grows every day more populous, notwithstanding 
the exposing of children,^' the inhabitants are incessantly em- 
ployed in tilling the lands for their subsistence. This requires 
a very extraordinary attention in the government. It is their 
perpetual concern that every man should have it in his power to 
work, without the apprehension of being deprived of the fruits 
of his labor. Consequently this is not so much a civil as a do- 
mestic government. 

Such has been the origin of those regulations which have 
been so greatly extolled. They wanted to make the laws reign 
in conjunction with despotic power ; but whatever is joined to 
the latter loses all its force. In vain did this arbitrary sway, 

V See the order of Tsongtou for tilling the land, in the " Edifying Letters." 
2ist collection. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 125 

laboring under its own inconveniences, desire to be fettered ; 
it armed itself with its chains, and has become still more ter- 
rible. 

China is, therefore, a despotic state, whose principle is fear. 
Perhaps in the earliest dynasties, when the empire had not so 
large an extent, the government might have deviated a little 
from this spirit ; but the case is otherwise at present. 



BOOK IX 

OF LAWS IN THE RELATION THEY BEAR TO A 
DEFENSIVE FORCE 

I. — In what Manner Republics provide for their Safety 

IF a republic be small, it is destroyed by a foreign force; 
if it be large, it is ruined by an internal imperfection. 
To this twofold inconvenience democracies and aris- 
tocracies are equally liable, whether they be good or bad. The 
evil is in the very thing itself, and no form can redress it. 

It is, therefore, very probable that mankind would have been, 
at length, obliged to live constantly under the government of 
a single person, had they not contrived a kind of constitution 
that has all the internal advantages of a republican, together 
with the external force of a monarchical, government. I mean 
a confederate republic. 

This form of government is a convention by which several 
petty states agree to become members of a larger one, which 
they intend to establish. It is a kind of assemblage of socie- 
ties, that constitute a new one, capable of increasing by means 
of further associations, till they arrive at such a degree of power 
as to be able to provide for the security of the whole body. 

It was these associations that so long contributed to the 
prosperity of Greece. By these the Romans attacked the whole 
globe, and by these alone the whole globe withstood them ; for 
when Rome had arrived at her highest pitch of grandeur, it was 
the associations beyond the Danube and the Rhine — associa- 
tions formed by the terror of her arms — ^that enabled the bar- 
barians to resist her. 

Hence it proceeds that Holland,^ Germany, and the Swiss 
cantons are considered in Europe as perpetual republics. 

a It is composed of about fifty differ- upon this remark that Montesquieu has 

ent republics, all different from one an- taken each of the independent cities as 

other.—" State of the United Prov- a republic. — Ed. 
inces," by M. Janisson. Voltaire notes 

126 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 127 

The associations of cities were formerly more necessary than 
in our times. A weak, defenceless town was exposed to 
greater danger. By conquest it was deprived not only of the 
executive and legislative power, as at present, but, moreover, 
cf all human property.^ 

A republic of this kind, able to withstand an external force, 
may support itself without any internal corruption ; the form 
of this society prevents all manner of inconveniences. 

If a single member should attempt to usurp the supreme 
power, he could not be supposed to have an equal authority 
and credit in all the confederate states. Were he to have too 
great an influence over one, this would alarm the rest ; were 
her to subdue a part, that which would still remain free might 
oppose him with forces independent of those which he had 
usurped, and overpower him before he could be settled in his 
usurpation. 

Should a popular insurrection happen in one of the confed- 
erate states, the others are able to quell it. Should abuses creep 
into one part, they are reformed by those that remain sound. 
The state may be destroyed on one side, and not on the other ; 
the confederacy may be dissolved, and the confederates pre- 
serve their sovereignty. 

As this government is composed of petty republics, it enjoys 
the internal happiness of each ; and with regard to its external 
situation, by means of the association, it possesses all the ad- 
Vantages of large monarchies. 

2. — That a confederate Government ought to he composed of 
States of the same Nature, especially of the republican Kind 

The Canaanitcs were destroyed by reason that they were 
petty monarchies that had no union or confederacy for their 
common defence ; and, indeed, a confederacy is not agreeable 
to the nature of petty monarchies. 

As the confederate republic of Germany consists of free cities, 
and of petty states subject to different princes, experience shows 
us that it is much more imperfect than that of Holland and 
Switzerland. 

The spirit of monarchy is war and enlargement of dominion: 

b Civil liberty, goods, wives, children, temples, and even burying-places. 



128 MONTESQUIEU 

peace and moderation are the spirit of a republic. These two 
kinds of government cannot naturally subsist in a confederate 
republic. 

Thus we observe, in the Roman history, that when the Veien- 
tes had chosen a king, they were immediately abandoned by all 
the other petty republics of Tuscany. Greece was undone as 
soon as the kings of Macedon obtained a seat among the 
Amphictyons. 

The confederate republic of Germany, composed of princes 
and free towns, subsists by means of a chief, who is, in some 
respects, the magistrate of the union, in others the monarch. 

3. — Other Requisites in a confederate Republic 

In the republic of Holland one province cannot conclude an 
alliance without the consent of the others. This law, which is 
an excellent one, and even necessary in a confederate republic, 
is wanting in the Germanic constitution, where it would pre- 
vent the misfortunes that may happen to the whole confederacy, 
through the imprudence, ambition, or avarice of a single mem- 
ber. A republic united by a political confederacy has given 
itself entirely up, and has nothing more to resign. 

It is difficult for the united states to be all of equal power 
and extent. The Lycian c republic was an association of twen- 
ty-three towns ; the large ones had three votes in the common 
council, the middling ones two, and the small towns one. The 
Dutch republic consists of seven provinces of different extent 
of territory, which have each one voice. 

The cities of Lycia d contributed to the expenses of the state, 
according to the proportion of suffrages. The provinces of the 
United Netherlands cannot follow this proportion ; they must 
be directed by that of their power. 

In Lycia ^ the judges and town magistrates were elected by 
the common council, and according to the proportion already 
mentioned. In the republic of Holland they are not chosen 
by the common council, but each town names its magistrates. 
Were I to give a model of an excellent confederate republic, I 
should pitch upon that of Lycia. 

c Strabo, lib. XIV. d Ibid. e Ibid. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 129 

4. — In what Manner despotic Governments provide for their 

Security 

As republics provide for their security by uniting, despotic 
governments do it by separating, and by keeping themselves, 
as it were, single. They sacrifice a part of the country ; and 
by ravaging and desolating the frontiers they render the heart 
of the empire inaccessible. 

It is a received axiom in geometry that the greater the ex- 
tent of bodies, the more their circumference is relatively small. 
This practice, therefore, of laying the frontiers waste is more 
tolerable in large than in middling states. 

A despotic government does all the mischief to itself that 
could be committed by a cruel enemy, whose arms it were un- 
able to resist. 

It preserves itself likewise by another kind of separation, 
which is by putting the most distant provinces into the hands 
of a great vassal. The Mogul, the King of Persia, and the em- 
perors of China have their feudatories ; and the Turks have 
found their account in putting the Tartars, the Moldavians, 
the Wallachians, and formerly the Transylvanians between 
themselves and their enemies. 

5. — In zi'hat Manner a Monarchical Government provides for 

its Security 

A monarchy never destroys itself like a despotic government. 
But a kingdom of a moderate extent is liable to sudden inva- 
sions : it must, therefore, have fortresses to defend its frontiers ; 
and troops to garrison those fortresses. The least spot of 
ground is disputed with military skill and resolution. Despotic 
states make incursions against one another; it is monarchies 
only that wage war. 

Fortresses are proper for monarchies ; despotic governments 
are afraid of them. They dare not intrust their oflficers with 
such a command, as none of them have any affection for the 
prince or his government. 

6. — Of the defensive Force of States in genera! 

To preserve a state in its due force, it must have such an 
extent as to admit of a proportion between the celerity with 
which it may be invaded, and that with which it may defeat the 
Vol. I.— 9 



I30 MONTESQUIEU 

invasion. As an invader may appear on every side, it is requi- 
site that the state should be able to make on every side its de- 
fence ; consequently it should be of a moderate extent, propor- 
tioned to the degree of velocity that nature has given to man, 
to enable him to move from one place to another. 

France and Spain are exactly of a proper extent. They have 
so easy a communication for their forces as to be able to con- 
vey them immediately to what part they have a mind ; the 
armies unite and pass with rapidity from one frontier to an- 
other, without any apprehension of such difficulties as require 
time to remove. 

It is extremely happy for France that the capital stands near 
to the different frontiers in proportion to their weakness ; and 
the prince has a better view of each part of his country accord- 
ing as it is more exposed. 

But when a vast empire, like Persia, is attacked, it is several 
months before the troops are assembled in a body ; and then 
they are not able to make such forced marches, for that space 
of time, as they could for fifteen days. Should the army on the 
frontiers be defeated, it is soon dispersed, because there is no 
neighboring place of retreat. The victor, meeting with no 
resistance, advances with all expedition, sits down before the 
capital and lays siege to it, when there is scarcely time suffi- 
cient to summon the governors of the provinces to its relief. 
Those who foresee an approaching revolution hasten it by 
their disobedience. For men whose fidelity is entirely owing 
to the danger of punishment are easily corrupted as soon as it 
becomes distant ; their aim is their own private interest. The 
empire is subverted, the capital taken, and the conqueror dis- 
putes the several provinces with the governors. 

The real power of a prince does not consist so much in the 
facility he meets with in making conquests as in the difficulty 
an enemy finds in attacking him, and, if I may so speak, in the 
immutability of his condition. But the increase of territory 
obliges a government to lay itself more open to an enemy. 

As monarchs, therefore, ought to be endued with wisdom in 
order to increase their power, they ought likewise to have an 
equal share of prudence to confine it within bounds. Upon 
removing the inconveniences of too small a territory, they 
should have their eye constantly on the inconveniences which 
attend its extent. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 131 

7. — A Reflection 

The enemies of a great prince, whose reign was protracted 
to an unusual length, have very often accused him, rather, I 
believe, from their own fears than upon any solid foundation, 
of having formed and carried on a project of universal mon- 
archy. Had he attained his aim, nothing would have been 
more fatal to his subjects, to himself, to his family, and to all 
Europe. Heaven, that knows our true interests, favored him 
more by preventing the success of his arms than it could have 
done by crowning him with victories. Instead of raising him 
to be the only sovereign in Europe, it made him happier by 
rendering him the most powerful. 

The subjects of this prince, who in travelling abroad are 
never afifected but with what they have left at home ; who on 
quitting their own habitations look upon glory as their chief 
object, and in distant countries as an obstacle to their return ; 
who disgust you even by their good qualities, because they are 
tainted with so much vanity ; who are capable of supporting 
wounds, perils, and fatigues, but not of foregoing their pleas- 
ures; who are supremely fond of gayety, and comfort them- 
selves for the loss of a battle by a song upon the general — those 
subjects, I say, would never have the solidity requisite for an 
enterprise of this kind, which if defeated in one country would 
be unsuccessful everywhere else; and if once unsuccessful 
would be so forever. 

8. — A particular Case in zvhich the defensive Force of a State 
is inferior to the offensive 

It was a saying of the Lord of Coucy to King Charles V 
" that the English are never weaker, nor more easily overcome, 
than in their own country." The same was observed of the 
Romans ; the same of the Carthaginians ; and the same will 
happen to every power that sends armies to distant countries, 
in order to re-unite by discipline and military force those who 
are divided among themselves by political or civil interests. 
The state finds itself weakened by the disorder that still con- 
tinues, and more so by the remedy. 

The Lord of Coucy's maxim is an exception to the general 
rule, which disapproves of wars against distant countries. And 



132 MONTESQUIEU 

this exception confirms likewise the rule because it takes place 
only with regard to those by whom such wars are undertaken. 

9. — Of the relative Force of States 

All grandeur, force, and power are relative. Care, therefore, 
must be taken that in endeavoring to increase the real grandeur, 
the relative be not diminished. 

During the reign of Louis XIV, France was at its highest 
pitch of relative grandeur. Germany had not yet produced 
such powerful princes as have since appeared in that country. 
Italy was in the same case. England and Scotland were not 
yet formed into one united kingdom. Aragon was not joined 
to Castile : the distant branches of the Spanish monarchy were 
weakened by it, and weakened it in their turn ; and Muscovy 
was as little known in Europe as Crim Tartary. 

10. — Of the Weakness of neighhoring States 

Whensoever a state lies contiguous to another that happens 
to be in its decline, the former ought to take particular care not 
to precipitate the ruin of the latter, because this is the happiest 
situation imaginable ; nothing being so convenient as for one 
prince to be near another, who receives for him all the rebuffs 
and insults of fortune. And it seldom happens that by subdu- 
ing such a state the real power of the conqueror is as much 
increased as the relative is diminished. 



BOOK X 

OF LAWS IN THE RELATION THEY BEAR TO 

OFFENSIVE FORCE 



O 



I. — Of offensive Force 

FFENSIVE force is regulated by the law of nations, 
which is the poHtical law of each country considered 
in its relation to every other. 



2.— Of War 

The life of g-overnments is like that of man. The latter has 
a right to kill in case of natural defence: the former have a 
right to wage war for their own preservation. 

In the case of natural defence I have a right to kill, because 
my life is in respect to me what the life of my antagonist is to 
him : in the same manner a state wages war because its preser- 
vation is like that of any other being. 

With individuals the right of natural defence does not imply 
a necessity of attacking. Instead of attacking they need only 
have recourse to proper tribunals. Tliey cannot, therefore, ex- 
ercise this right of defence but in sudden cases, when imme- 
diate death would be the consequence of waiting for the as- 
sistance of the law. But with states the right of natural defence 
carries along with it sometimes the necessity of attacking; as, 
for instance, when one nation sees that a continuance of peace 
will enable another to destroy her, and that to attack that 
nation instantly is the only way to prevent her own destruction. 

Thence it follows that petty states have oftener a right to de- 
clare war than great ones, because they are oftener in the case 
of being afraid of destruction. 

The right, therefore, of war is derived from necessity and 
strict justice. If those who direct the conscience or councils 
of princes do not abide by this maxim, the consequence is 

133 



134 MONTESQUIEU 

dreadful : when they proceed on arbitrary principles of glory, 
convenience, and utility, torrents of blood must overspread the 
earth. 

But, above all, let them not plead such an idle pretext as the 
glory of the prince : his glory is nothing but pride ; it is a 
passion, and not a legitimate right. 

It is true the fame of his power might increase the strength 
of his government ; but it might be equally increased by the 
reputation of his justice. 

3. — Of the Right of Conquest 

From the right of war comes that of conquest ; which is the 
consequence of that right, and ought therefore to follow its 
spirit. 

The right the conqueror has over a conquered people is di- 
rected by four sorts of laws : the law of nature, which makes 
everything tend to the preservation of the species ; the law 
of natural reason, which teaches us to do to others what we 
would have done to ourselves ; the law that forms political 
societies, whose duration nature has not limited ; and, in fine, 
the law derived from the nature of the thing itself. Conquest 
is an acquisition, and carries with it the spirit of preservation 
and use, not of destruction. 

The inhabitants of a conquered country are treated by the 
conqueror in one of the four following ways : Either he con- 
tinues to rule them according to their own laws, and assumes 
to himself only the exercise of the political and civil govern- 
ment, or he gives them new political and civil government ; 
or he destroys and disperses the society; or, in fine, he ex- 
terminates the people. 

The first way is conformable to the law of nations now fol- 
lowed ; the fourth is more agreeable to the law of nations fol- 
lowed by the Romans : in respect to which I leave the reader 
to judge how far we have improved upon the ancients. We 
must give due commendations to our modern refinements in 
reason, religion, philosophy, and manners. 

The authors of our public law, guided by ancient histories, 
without confining themselves to cases of strict necessity, have 
fallen into very great errors. They have adopted tyrannical 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 135 

and arbitrary principles, by supposing the conquerors to be in- 
vested with I know not what right to kill: thence they have 
drawn consequences as terrible as the very principle, and es- 
tablished maxims which the conquerors themselves, when pos- 
sessed of the least grain of sense, never presumed to follow. It 
is a plain case, that when the conquest is completed, the con- 
queror has no longer a right to kill, because he has no longer 
the plea of natural defence and self-preservation. 

What has led them into this mistake is, that they imagined 
a conqueror had a right to destroy the state ; whence they in- 
ferred that he had a right to destroy the men that compose it : 
a wrong consequence from a false principle. For from the 
destruction of the state it does not at all follow that the people 
who compose it ought to be also destroyed. The state is the 
association of men, and not the men themselves ; the citizen 
may perish, and the man remain. 

From the right of killing in the case of conquest, politicians 
have drawn that of reducing to slavery — a consequence as ill 
grounded as the principle. 

There is no such thing as a right of reducing people to 
slavery, save when it becomes necessary for the preservation of 
the conquest. Preservation, and not servitude, is the end of 
conquest ; though servitude may happen sometimes to be a 
necessary means of preservation. 

Even in that case it is contrary to the nature of things that 
the slavery should be perpetual. The people enslaved ought 
to be rendered capable of becoming subjects. Slavery in con- 
quests is an accidental thing. When after the expiration of a 
certain space of time all the parts of the conquering state are 
connected with the conquered nation, by custom, marriages, 
laws, associations, and by a certain conformity of disposition, 
there ought to be an end of the slavery. For the rights of the 
conqueror are founded entirely on the opposition between the 
two nations in those very articles, whence prejudices arise, and 
the want of mutual confidence. 

A conqueror, therefore, who reduces the conquered people 
to slavery, ought always to reserve to himself the means (for 
means there are without number) of restoring them to their 
liberty. 

These are far from being vague and uncertain notions. Thus 



136 MONTESQUIEU 

our ancestors acted, those ancestors who conquered the Roman 
Empire. The laws they made in the heat and transport of pas- 
sion and in the insolence of victory were gradually softened ; 
those laws were at first severe, but were afterwards rendered 
impartial. The Burgundians, Goths, and Lombards would 
have the Romans continue a conquered people ; but the laws 
of Euric, Gundebald, and Rotharis made the Romans and bar- 
barians fellow-citizens. o 

Charlemagne, to tame the Saxons, deprived them of their 
liberty and property. Louis the Debonnaire made them a free 
people,^ and this was one of the most prudent regulations dur- 
ing his whole reign. Time and servitude had softened their 
manners, and they ever after adhered to him with the greatest 
fidelity. 

4- — Some Advantages of a conquered People 

Instead of inferring such destructive consequences from the 
right of conquest, much better would it have been for politicians 
to mention the advantages which this very right may sometimes 
give to a conquered people — advantages which would be more 
sensibly and more universally experienced were our law of 
nations exactly followed, and established in every part of the 
globe. 

Conquered countries are, generally speaking, degenerated 
from their original institution. Corruption has crept in, the 
execution of the laws has been neglected, and the government 
has grown oppressive. Who can question but such a state 
would be a gainer, and derive some advantages, from the very 
conquest itself, if it did not prove destructive ? When a gov- 
ernment has arrived at that degree of corruption as to be in- 
capable of reforming itself, it would not lose much by being 
newly moulded. A conqueror who enters triumphant into a 
country where the moneyed men have, by a variety of artifices, 
insensibly arrived at innumerable ways of encroaching on the 
public, where the miserable people, who see abuses grown into 
laws, are ready to sink under the weight of oppression, yet think 
they have no right to apply for redress — a conqueror, I say, 
may make a total change, and then the tyranny of those 
wretches will be the first thing exposed to his resentment. 

a See the Code of Barbarian laws. " Life of Louis the Debonnaire," in 

bee the anonymous author of the Duchesne's collection, torn. ii. p. 296. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 137 

We have beheld, for instance, countries oppressed by the 
farmers of the revenues, and eased afterwards by the conqueror, 
who had neither the engagements nor wants of the legitimate 
prince. Even the abuses have been often redressed without any 
interposition of the conqueror. 

Sometimes the frugality of a conquering nation has enabled 
them to allow the conquered those necessaries of which they 
had been deprived under a lawful prince. 

A conquest may destroy pernicious prejudices, and lay, if I 
may presume to use the expression, the nation under a better 
genius. 

What good might not the Spaniards have done to the Mexi- 
cans ? They had a mild religion to impart to them ; but they 
filled their heads with a frantic superstition. They might have 
set slaves at liberty ; they made freemen slaves. They might 
have undeceived them with regard to the abuse of human sac- 
rifices ; instead of that they destroyed them. Never should I 
have finished, were I to recount all the good they might have 
done, and all the mischief they committed. 

It is a conqueror's business to repair a part of the mischief 
he has occasioned. The right, therefore, of conquest I define 
thus : a necessary, lawful, but unhappy power, which leaves the 
conqueror under a heavy obligation of repairing the injuries 
done to humanity. 

5. — Gelon, King of Syracuse 

The noblest treaty of peace ever mentioned in history is, in 
my opinion, that which Gelon made with the Carthaginians. 
He insisted upon their abolishing the custom of sacrificing their 
children.*^ Glorious, indeed ! After having defeated three hun- 
dred thousand Carthaginians, he required a condition that was 
advantageous only to themselves, or rather he stipulated in 
favor of human nature. 

The Bactrians exposed their aged fathers to be devoured by 
large mastiffs — a custom suppressed by Alexander,^ whereby 
he obtained a signal triumph over superstition. 

c See M. liarbeyrac's collection, art. 112. d Strabo, lib. XI. 



138 MONTESQUIEU 



6. — Of Conquest made by a Republic 

It is contrary to the nature of things that in a confederate 
government one state should make any conquest over another, 
as in our days we have seen in Switzerland.^ In mixed con- 
federate republics, where the association is between petty re- 
publics and monarchies, of a small extent, this is not so ab- 
surd. 

Contrary is it also to the nature of things that a democratic 
republic should conquer towns which cannot enter into the 
sphere of its democracy. It is necessary that the conquered 
people should be capable of enjoying the privileges of sover- 
eignty as was settled in the very beginning among the Romans. 
The conquest ought to be limited to the number of citizens fixed 
for the democracy. 

If a democratic republic subdues a nation in order to govern 
them as subjects, it exposes its own liberty ; because it in- 
trusts too great a power to those who are appointed to the com- 
mand of the conquered provinces. 

How dangerous would have been the situation of the re- 
public of Carthage had Hannibal made himself master of 
Rome ? What would he not have done in his own country, had 
he been victorious, he who caused so many revolutions in it 
after his defeat ?f 

Hanno could never have dissuaded the Senate from sending 
succor to Hannibal, had he used no other argument than his 
own jealousy. The Carthaginian Senate, whose wisdom is so 
highly extolled by Aristotle (and which has been evidently 
proved by the prosperity of that republic), could never have 
been determined by other than solid reasons. They must have 
been stupid not to see that an army at the distance of three 
hundred leagues would necessarily be exposed to losses which 
required reparation. 

Hanno's party insisted that Hannibal should be delivered up 
to the Romans.? They could not at that time be afraid of the 
Romans ; they were, therefore, apprehensive of Hannibal. 

It was impossible, some will say, for them to imagine that 
Hannibal had been so successful. But how was it possible for 

e With regard to Torkenburg. g Hanno wanted to deliver Hannibal 

f He was at the head of a faction. up to the Romans, as Cato would fain 

have delivered up Caesar to the Gauls. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 139 

them to doubt it? Could the Carthaginians, a people spread 
over all the earth, be ignorant of what was transacting in Italy ? 
No : they were sufficiently acquainted with it, and for that rea- 
son they did not care to send supplies to Hannibal. 

Hanno became more resolute after the battle of Trebia, after 
the battle of Thrasimenus, after that of Cannae ; it was not his 
incredulity that increased, but his fear. 



7. — The same Subject continued 

There is still another inconvenience in conquests made by 
democracies : their government is ever odious to the conquered 
states. It is apparently monarchical : but in reality it is much 
more oppressive than monarchy, as the experience of all ages 
and countries evinces. 

The conquered people are in a melancholy situation ; they 
neither enjoy the advantages of a republic, nor those of a mon- 
archy. 

What has been here said of a popular state is applicable to 
aristocracy. 

8. — The same Subject continued 

When a republic, therefore, keeps another nation in subjec- 
tion, it should endeavor to repair the inconveniences arising 
from the nature of its situation by giving it good laws both for 
the political and civil government of the people. 

We have an instance of an island in the Mediterranean, sub- 
ject to an Italian republic, whose political and civil laws with 
regard to the inhabitants of that island were extremely de- 
fective. The act of indemnity,/^ by which it ordained that no 
one should be condemned to bodily punishment in consequence 
of the private knowledge of the governor, ex informata con- 
scicntia, is still recent in everybody's memory. There have been 
frequent instances of the people's petitioning for privileges ; 
here the sovereign grants only the common right of all na- 
tions. 

/i Of October i8, 1738, printer! at nnzionale in pena afflittiva; potra bensi 

Genoa by Franchelli: "Victiamo al nos- arrestnrc ed incarcerare le personc che 

tro general povcrnatore in detta Isola rM saranno sospette, salvo di rcnderne 

di condannarc in avvcnire solamcnte ex poi a noi cento sollecitamente." — Art. 6. 
informata conscientia persona alcuna 



I40 MONTESQUIEU 



9. — Of Conquests made by a Monarchy 

If a monarchy can long subsist before it is weakened by its 
increase, it will become formidable ; and its strength will re- 
main entire, while pent up by the neighboring monarchies. 

It ought not, therefore, to aim at conquests beyond the 
natural limits of its government. So soon as it has passed these 
limits, it is prudence to stop. 

In this kind of conquest things must be left as they were 
found — the same courts of judicature, the same laws, the same 
customs, the same privileges : there ought to be no other al- 
teration than that of the army and of the name of the sovereign. 

When a monarchy has extended its limits by the conquest of 
neighboring provinces, it should treat those provinces with 
great lenity. 

If a monarchy has been long endeavoring at conquest, the 
provinces of its ancient demesne are generally ill used. They 
are obliged to submit both to the new and to the ancient abuses ; 
and to be depopulated by a vast metropolis, that swallows up 
the whole. Now if, after having made conquests round this 
demesne, the conquered people were treated like the ancient 
subjects, the state would be undone ; the taxes sent by the 
conquered provinces to the capital would never return ; the 
inhabitants of the frontiers would be ruined, and consequently 
the frontiers would be weaker ; the people would be disaf- 
fected ; and the subsistence of the armies designed to act and 
remain there would become more precarious. 

Such is the necessary state of a conquering monarchy : a 
shocking luxury in the capital ; misery in the provinces some- 
what distant ; and plenty in the most remote. It is the same 
with such a monarchy as with our planet : fire at the centre, 
verdure on the surface, and between both a dry, cold, and bar- 
ren earth. 

10. — Of one Monarchy that subdues another 

Sometimes one monarchy subdues another. The smaller the 
latter, the better it is over-awed by fortresses ; and the larger it 
is, the better will it be preserved by colonies. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



141 



II. — Of the Manners of a conquered People 

It is not sufficient in those conquests to let the conquered 
nation enjoy their own laws ; it is, perhaps, more necessary to 
leave them also their manners, because people in general have 
a stronger attachment to these than to their laws. 

The French have been driven nine times out of Italy, because, 
as historians say,^ of their insolent familiarities with the fair 
sex. It is too much for a nation to be obliged to bear not only 
with the pride of conquerors, but with their incontinence and 
indiscretion ; these are, without doubt, most grievous and in- 
tolerable, as they are the source of infinite outrages, 

12. — Of a Lazu of Cyrus 

Far am I from thinking that a good law which Cyrus made 
to oblige the Lydians to practise none but mean or infamous 
professions. It is true he directed his attention to an object 
of the greatest importance : he thought of guarding against 
revolts, and not invasions ; but invasions will soon come, when 
the Persians and Lydians unite and corrupt each other. I 
would, therefore, much rather support by laws the simplicity 
and rudeness of the conquering nation than the efifeminacy of 
the conquered. 

Aristodemus, tyrant of Cumae,/ used all his endeavors to 
banish courage, and to enervate the minds of youth. He or- 
dered that boys should let their hair grow in the same manner 
as girls, that they should deck it with flowers, and wear long 
robes of different colors down to their heels ; that when they 
went to their masters of music and dancing, they should have 
women with them to carry their umbrellas, perfumes, and fans, 
and to present them with combs and looking-glasses whenever 
they bathed. This education lasted till the age of twenty — an 
education that could be agreeable to none but to a petty tyrant, 
who exposes his sovereignty to defend his life. 

13. — Charles XII 
This prince, who depended entirely on his own strength, 
hastened his ruin by forming designs that could never be exe- 
cuted but by a long war — a thing which his kingdom was 
unable to support. 

i See Puffendorf 's " Universal History." / Dionys. Halicar. lib. VII. 



142 MONTESQUIEU 

It was not a declining state he undertook to subvert, but a 
rising empire. The Russians made use of the war he waged 
against them as of a mihtary school. Every defeat brought 
them nearer to victory; and, losing abroad, they learned to 
defend themselves at home. 

Charles, in the deserts of Poland, imagined himself sovereign 
of the whold world : here he wandered, and with him in some 
measure wandered Sweden ; while his capital enemy acquired 
new strength against him, locked him up, made settlements 
along the Baltic, destroyed or subdued Livonia. 

Sweden was like a river whose waters are cut ofif at the foun- 
tain-head in order to change its course. 

It was not the affair of Pultowa that ruined Charles. Had 
he not been destroyed at that place, he would have been in an- 
other. The casualties of fortune are easily repaired ; but who 
can be guarded against events that incessantly arise from the 
nature of things ? 

But neither nature nor fortune were ever so much against 
him as he himself. 

He was not directed by the present situation of things, but 
by a kind of plan of his forming ; and even this he followed 
very ill. He was not an Alexander ; but he would have made 
an excellent soldier under that monarch. 

Alexander's project succeeded because it was prudently con- 
certed.^ The bad success of the Persians in their several in- 
vasions of Greece, the conquests of Agesilaus, and the retreat 
of the ten thousand had shown to demonstration the superiority 
of the Greeks in their manner of fighting and in their arms ; 
and it was well known that the Persians were too proud to be 
corrected. 

It was no longer possible for them to weaken Greece by di- 
visions : Greece was then united under one head, which could 
not pitch upon a better method of rendering her insensible to 
her servitude than by flattering her vanity with the destruction 
of her hereditary enemy, and with the hopes of the conquest of 
Asia. 

An empire cultivated by the most industrious nation in the 
world, that followed agriculture from a principle of religion — 

k Montesquieu, Voltaire, and Robert- the first historians to render justice to 
son (in his " History of America") were this extraordinary general. — Servan. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



143 



an empire abounding with every convenience of life — furnished 
the enemy with all necessary means of subsisting. 

It was easy to judge by the pride of those kings, who in vain 
were mortified by their numerous defeats, that they would pre- 
cipitate their ruin by their forwardness in venturing battles ; 
and that the flattery of their courtiers would never permit them 
to doubt of their grandeur. 

The project was not only wise, but wisely executed. Alex- 
ander, in the rapidity of his conquests, even in the impetuosity 
of his passion, had, if I may so express myself, a flash of reason 
by which he was directed, and which those who would fain have 
made a romance of his history, and whose minds were more 
corrupt than his, could not conceal from our view. Let us 
descend more minutely into his history. 

14. — Alexander 

He did not set out upon his expedition till he had secured 
Macedonia against the neighboring barbarians, and completed 
the reduction of Greece ; he availed himself of this conquest 
for no other end than for the execution of his grand enterprise ; 
he rendered the jealousy of the Lacedaemonians of no effect ; he 
attacked the maritime provinces ; he caused his land forces to 
keep close to the sea-coast, that they might not be separated 
from his fleet ; he made an admirable use of discipline against 
numbers ; he never wanted provisions ; and if it be true that 
victory gave him everything, he, in his turn, did everything 
to obtain it. 

Tn the beginning of his enterprise — a time when the least 
check might have proved his destruction — he trusted very lit- 
tle to fortune ; but when his reputation was established by a 
series of prosperous events, he sometimes had recourse to 
temerity. When before his departure for Asia he marched 
against the Triballians and Illyrians, you find he waged war^ 
against those people in the very same manner as Caesar after- 
wards conducted that against the Gauls. Upon his return to 
Greece,"' it was in some measure against his will that he took 
and destroyed Thebes. When he invested that city, he wanted 
the inhabitants to come into terms of peace ; but they hastened 
their own ruin. When it was debated, whether he should at- 

/ See Arrian, " De Expedit. Alexandri," lib. I. tn Ibid. 



144 MONTESQUIEU 

tack the Persian fleet," it is Parmenio who shows his presump- 
tion, Alexander his wisdom. His aim was, to draw the Persians 
from the sea-coast, and to lay them under a necessity of aban- 
doning their marine, in which they had a manifest superiority. 
Tyre being from principle attached to the Persians, who could 
not subsist without the commerce and navigation of that city, 
Alexander destroyed it. He subdued Egypt, which Darius had 
left bare of troops while he was assembling immense armies in 
another world. 

To the passage of the Granicus, Alexander owed the con- 
quest of the Greek colonies ; to the battle of Issus, the reduction 
of Tyre and Egypt ; to the battle of Arbela, the empire of the 
world. 

After the battle of Issus, he suffered Darius to escape, and 
employed his time in securing and regulating his conquests: 
after the battle of Arbela, he pursued him so closeo as to leave 
him no place of refuge in his empire. Darius enters his towns, 
his provinces, to quit them the next moment ; and Alexander 
marches with such rapidity that the empire of the world seems 
to be rather the prize of an Olympian race than the fruit of a 
great victory. 

In this manner he carried on his conquests : let us now see 
how he preserved them. 

He opposed those who would have had him treat the Greeks 
as masters/' and the Persians as slaves. He thought only of 
uniting the two nations, and of abolishing the distinctions of 
a conquering and a conquered people. After he had completed 
his victories, he relinquished all those prejudices that had 
helped him to obtain them. He assumed the manners of the 
Persians, that he might not chagrin them too much by obliging 
them to conform to those of the Greeks. It was this humanity 
which made him show so great a respect for the wife and mother 
of Darius ; and this that made him so continent. What a con- 
queror! He is lamented by all the nations he has subdued! 
What a usurper ! At his death the very family he has cast from 
the throne is all in tears. These were the most glorious pas- 
sages in his life, and such as history cannot produce an instance 
of in any other conqueror. 

n See Arrian, " De Expedit. Alexan- p This was Aristotle's advice. Plu- 

dri," lib. I. tarch's " Morals," of the fortune and 

o Ibid. lib. III. virtue of Alexander. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 145 

Nothing consolidates a conquest more than the union formed 
between the two nations by marriages. Alexander chose his 
wives from the nation he had subdued ; he insisted on his cour- 
tiers doing the same ; and the rest of the Macedonians followed 
the example. The Franks and Burgundians permitted those 
marriages ;g the Visigoths forbade them in Spain, and after- 
wards allowed them.^ By the Lombards they were not only al- 
lowed, but encouraged.-s When the Romans wanted to weaken 
Macedonia, they ordered that there should be no intermarriages 
between the people of different provinces. 

Alexander, whose aim was to unite the two nations, thought 
lit to establish in Persia a great number of Greek colonies. He 
buih, therefore, a multitude of towns ; and so strongly were all 
the parts of this new empire cemented, that after his decease, 
amidst the disturbances and confusion of the most frightful 
civil wars, when the Greeks had reduced themselves, as it 
were, to a state of annihilation, not a single province of Persia 
revolted. 

To prevent Greece and Macedon from being too much ex- 
hausted, he sent a colony of Jewso to Alexandria ; the man- 
ners of those people signified nothing to him, provided he 
could be sure of their fidelity. 

He not only suffered the conquered nations to retain their 
own customs and manners, but likewise their civil laws ; and 
frequently the very kings and governors to whom they had 
been subject : the Macedonians^ he placed at the head of the 
troops, and the natives of the country at the head of the gov- 
ernment, rather choosing to run the hazard of a particular dis- 
loyalty (which sometimes happened) than of a general revolt. 

He paid great respect to the ancient traditions, and to all the 
public monuments of the glory or vanity of nations. The Per- 
sian monarchs having destroyed the temples of the Greeks, 
Babylonians, and Egyptians, Alexander rebuilt them '.c few 
nations submitted to his yoke to whose religion he did not con- 
form ; and his conquests seem to have been intended only to 

q See the " Law of the Burgundians," a Tlie kings of Syria, abandoning the 

tit. ij, art. 5. plan laid down by the founder of the 

r See the " Law of the Visigoths," empire, resolved to oblige tlie Jews to 

book III. tiK I, sec. i, which abrogates conform to the manners of the (jreeks 

the ancient law, that had more regard, — a resolution that gave the most ter- 

it says, to the difference of nations than rible shock to their government, 

to that of people's conditions. h See Arrian, " De Expedit. Alexao- 

.? .See the "Law of the Lombards," dri," lib. IIL, and others. 

book I.I. tit. 7, sees, i and 2. c Ibid. 

Vol. I.— 10 



146 MONTESQUIEU 

make him the particular monarch of each nation, and the first 
inhabitant of each city. The aim of the Romans in conquest 
was to destroy, his to preserve ; and wherever he directed his 
victorious arms, his chief view was to achieve something, 
whence that country might derive an increase of prosperity 
and power. To attain this end, he was enabled first of all by the 
greatness of his genius ; secondly, by his frugality and private 
economy ;d thirdly, by his profusion in matters of importance. 
He was close and reserved in his private expenses, but gen- 
erous to the highest degree in those of a public nature. In 
regulating his household, he was the private Macedonian ; but 
in paying the troops, in sharing his conquests with the Greeks, 
and in his largesses to every soldier in his army, he was Alex- 
ander. 

He committed two very bad actions in setting Persepolis on 
fire and slaying Chtus ; but he rendered them famous by his 
repentance. Hence it is that his crimes are forgotten, while 
his regard for virtue was recorded : they were considered rather 
as unlucky accidents than as his own deliberate acts. Poster- 
ity, struck with the beauty of his mind, even in the midst of his 
irregular passion, can view him only with pity, but never with 
an eye of hatred. 

Let us draw a comparison between him and Caesar. The 
Roman general, by attempting to imitate the Asiatic monarch, 
flung his fellow-citizens into a state of despair for a matter of 
mere ostentation ; the Macedonian prince, by the same imita- 
tion, did a thing which was quite agreeable to his original 
scheme of conquest. 

15. — New Methods of preserving a Conquest 

When a monarch has subdued a large country, he may make 
use of an admirable method equally proper for moderating des- 
potic power, and for preserving the conquest ; it is a method 
practised by the conquerors of China. 

In order to prevent the vanquished nation from falling into 
despair, the victors from growing insolent and proud, the gov- 
ernment from becoming military, and to contain the two na- 
tions within their duty, the Tartar family now on the throne 
of China has ordained that every military corps in the provinces 

d See Arrian, " De Expedit. Alexandri," lib. III., and others. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 147 

should be composed half of Chinese and half Tartars, to the end 
that the jealousy between the two nations may keep them with- 
in bounds. The courts of judicature are likewise half Chinese 
and half Tartars. This is productive of several good effects : 
I. The two nations are a check to one another. 2. They both 
preserve the civil and military power, and one is not destroyed 
by the other. 3. The conquering nation may spread itself with- 
out being weakened and lost. It is likewise enabled to with- 
stand civil and foreign wars. The want of so wise an institu- 
tion as this has been the ruin of almost all the conquerors that 
ever existed. 

16. — Of Conquests made by a despotic Prince 

When a conquest happens to be vastly large, it supposes a 
despotic power ; and then the army dispersed in the provinces 
is not sufficient. There should be always a body of faithful 
troops near the prince, ready to fall instantly upon any part of 
the empire that may chance to waver. This military corps 
ought to awe the rest, and to strike terror into those who 
through necessity have been intrusted with any authority in 
the empire. The emperor of China has always a large body of 
Tartars near his person, ready upon all occasions. In India, 
in Turkey, in Japan, the prince has always a body-guard inde- 
pendent of the other regular forces. This particular corps 
keeps the dispersed troops in awe. 

17. — The same Subject continued 

We have observed that the countries subdued by a despotic 
monarch ought to be held by a vassal. Historians are very 
lavish of their praises of the generosity of those conquerors 
who restored the princes to the throne whom they had van- 
quished. Extremely generous, then, were the Romans, who 
made such a number of kings, in order to have instruments of 
slavery.^ A proceeding of that kind is absolutely necessary. 
If the conqueror intends to preserve the country which he has 
subdued, neither the governors he sends will be able to contain 
the subjects within duty, nor he himself the governors. He 
will be obliged to strip his ancient patrimony of troops, in 

e " Ut haberent instrumenta servitutis et reges."— Tacitus, " Life of Agricola," 
14. 



148 MONTESQUIEU 

order to secure his new dominions. The miseries of each na- 
tion will be common to both ; civil broils will spread them- 
selves from one to the other. On the contrary, if the conqueror 
restores the legitimate prince to the throne, he will of course 
have an ally; by the junction of whose forces his own power 
will be augmented. We have a recent instance of this in Shah 
Nadir, who conquered the Mogul, seized his treasures, and left 
him in possession of Hindostan. 



BOOK XI 

OF THE LAWS WHICH ESTABLISH POLITICAL 
LIBERTY WITH REGARD TO THE CON-STITUTION. 

I. — A general Idea 

I MAKE a distinction between the laws that establish politi- 
cal liberty as it relates to the constitution, and those by 
which it is established as it relates to the citizen. The 
former shall be the subject of this book ; the latter I shall ex- 
c.mine in the next, 

2. — Different Significations of the word Liberty 

There is no word that admits of more various significations, 
and has made more varied impressions on the human mind, 
than that of liberty. Some have taken it as a means of depos- 
ing a person on whom they had conferred a tyrannical author- 
ity ; others for the power of choosing a superior whom they 
are obliged to obey ; others for the right of bearing arms, and 
of being thereby enabled to use violence; others, in fine, for 
the privilege of being governed by a native of their own coun- 
try, or by their own laws.o A certain nation for a long time 
thought liberty consisted in the privilege of wearing a long 
beard.^ Some have annexed this name to one form of govern- 
ment exclusive of others: those who had a republican taste 
applied it to this species of polity ; those who liked a monarchi- 
cal state gave it to monarchy.&lt;^ Thus they have all applied the 
name of liberty to the government most suitable to their own 
customs and inclinations : and as in rcpu1)lics the people have 
not so constant and so present a view of the causes of their 
misery, and as the magistrates seem to act only in conformity 

a " I have copied," says Cicero, b The Russians could not bear that 

" Scivola's edict, which permits the Czar Peter should make tliem cut if off. 

Greeks to terminate their diiTcrencc c The Cappadocians refused the con- 

among themselves according to their dition of a republican state, which was 

own laws; this makes them consider offered them by the Romans, 
themselves a free people." 

149 



I50 MONTESQUIEU 

to the laws, hence Hberty is generally said to reside in republics, 
and to be banished from monarchies. In fine, as in democra- 
cies the people seem to act almost as they please, this sort of 
government has been deemed the most free, and the power of 
the people has been confounded with their liberty. 

3. — In luhat Liberty consists 

It is true that in democracies the people seem to act as 
they please ; but political liberty does not consist in an un- 
limited freedom. In governments, that is, in societies directed 
by laws, liberty can consist only in the power of doing what we 
ought to will, and in not being constrained to do what we 
ought not to will. 

We must have continually present to our minds the differ- 
ence between independence and liberty. Liberty is a right of 
doing whatever the laws permit,c^ and if a citizen could do 
what they forbid he would be no longer possessed of liberty, 
because all his fellow-citizens would have the same power. 

4. — The same Subject continued 

Democratic and aristocratic states are not in their own nat- 
ure free. Political liberty is to be found only in moderate gov- 
ernments ; and even in these it is not always found. It is there 
only when there is no abuse of power. But constant experi- 
ence shows us that every man invested with power is apt to 
abuse it, and to carry his authority as far as it will go. Is it 
not strange, though true, to say that virtue itself has need of 
limits ? 

To prevent this abuse, it is necessary from the very nature 
of things that power should be a check to power. A govern- 
ment may be so constituted, as no man shall be compelled to 
do things to which the law does not oblige him, nor forced to 
abstain from things which the law permits. 

5. — Of the End or View or different Governments 

Though all governments have the same general end, which 
is that of preservation, yet each has another particular object. 
Increase of dominion was the object of Rome ; war, that of 

d " Omnts legum servi sumus ut liberi esse possimus." — Cicero, "pro Clu- 
entio," 53. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 151 

Sparta ; religion, that of the Jewish laws ; commerce, that of 
Marseilles ; public tranquillity, that of the laws of China : e 
navigation, that of the laws of Rhodes ; natural liberty, that of 
the policy of the Savages ; in general, the pleasures of the 
prince, that of despotic states ; that of monarchies, the prince's 
and the kingdom's glory ; the independence of individuals is 
the end aimed at by the laws of Poland, thence results the op- 
pression of the whole/ 

One nation there is also in the world that has for the direct 
end of its constitution political liberty. We shall presently ex- 
amine the principles on which this liberty is founded; if they 
are sound, liberty will appear in its highest perfection. 

To discover political liberty in a constitution, no great labor 
is requisite. If we are capable of seeing it where it exists, it is 
soon found, and we need not go far in search of it. 

6. — Of the Constitution of England g 

In every government there are three sorts of power: the 
legislative; the executive in respect to things dependent on 
the law of nations ; and the executive in regard to matters that 
depend on the civil law. 

By virtue of the first, the prince or magistrate enacts tem- 
porary or perpetual laws, and amends or abrogates those that 
have been already enacted. By the second, he makes peace or 
war, sends or receives embassies, establishes the public secur- 
ity, and provides against invasions. By the third, he punishes 
criminals, or determines the disputes that arise between indi- 
viduals. The latter we shall call the judiciary power, and the 
other simply the executive power of the state. 

The political liberty of the subject is a tranquillity of mind 
arising from the opinion each person has of his safety. In 
order to have this liberty, it is requisite the government be so 
constituted as one man need not be afraid of another. 

When the legislative and executive powers are united in the 
same person, or in the same body of magistrates, there can be 
no liberty ; because apprehensions may arise, lest the same 

e The natural end of a state that has g The greater part of the principles 
no foreign enemies, fir that thinks itself produced in this chapter by Monies- 
secured against them by harriers. quieu is derived from I&gt;ockc's " Treatise 

f Inconvenience of the " Liberum upon Civil Government," xii. — Ed. 
veto." 



152 MONTESQUIEU 

monarch or senate should enact tyrannical laws, to execute 
them in a tyrannical manner. 

Again, there is no Hberty, if the judiciary power be not 
separated from the legislative and executive. Were it joined 
with the legislative, the life and liberty of the subject would be 
exposed to arbitrary control ; for the judge would be then the 
legislator. Were it joined to the executive power, the judge 
might behave with violence and oppression. 

There would be an end of everything, were the same man 
or the same body, whether of the nobles or of the people, to 
exercise those three powers, that of enacting laws, that of exe- 
cuting the public resolutions, and of trying the causes of indi- 
viduals. 

Most kingdoms in Europe enjoy a moderate government 
because the prince who is invested with the two first powers 
leaves the third to his subjects. In Turkey, where these three 
powers are united in the Sultan's person, the subjects groan 
under the most dreadful oppression. 

In the republics of Italy, where these three powers are 
united, there is less liberty than in our monarchies. Hence 
their government is obliged to have recourse to as violent 
methods for its support as even that of the Turks ; witness the 
state inquisitors,/? and the lion's mouth into wliich every in- 
former may at all hours throw his written accusations. 

In what a situation must the poor subject be in those re- 
publics ! The same body of magistrates are possessed, as exec- 
utors of the laws, of the whole power they have given them- 
selves in quality of legislators. They may plunder the state 
by their general determinations ; and as they have likewise 
the judiciary power in their hands, every private citizen may 
be ruined by their particular decisions. 

The whole power is here united in one body ; and though 
there is no external pomp that indicates a despotic sway, yet 
the people feel the efifects of it every moment. 

Hence it is that many of the princes of Europe, whose aim 
has been levelled at arbitrary power, have constantly set out 
with uniting in their own persons all the branches of magis- 
tracy, and all the great offices of state. 

I allow indeed that the mere hereditary aristocracy of the 

h At Venice, 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 153 

Italian republics does not exactly answer to the despotic power 
of the Eastern princes. The number of magistrates sometimes 
moderate the power of the magistracy; the whole body of 
the nobles do not always concur in the same design ; and dif- 
ferent tribunals are erected, that temper each other. Thus at 
Venice the legislative power is in the council, the executive in 
the pregadi, and the judiciary in the quarantia. But the mis- 
chief is, that these different tribunals are composed of magis- 
trates all belonging to the same body; which constitutes al- 
most one and the same power. 

The judiciary power ought not to be given to a standing 
senate ; it should be exercised by persons taken from the body 
of the people i at certain times of the year, and consistently 
with a form and manner prescribed by law, in order to erect 
a tribunal that should last only so long as necessity requires. 

By this method the judicial power, so terrible to mankind, 
not being annexed to any particular state or profession, be- 
comes, as it were, invisible. People have not then the judges 
continually present to their view ; they fear the office, but not 
the magistrate. 

In accusations of a deep and criminal nature, it is proper 
the person accused should have the privilege of choosing, in 
some measure, his judges, in concurrence with the law ; or at 
least he should have a right to except against so great a num- 
ber that the remaining part may be deemed his own choice. 

The other two powers may be given rather to magistrates or 
permanent bodies, because they are not exercised on any pri- 
vate subject ; one being no more than the general will of the 
state, and the other the execution of that general will. 

But though the tribunals ought not to be fixed, the judg- 
ments ought ; and to such a degree as to be ever conformable 
to the letter of the law. Were they to be the private opinion 
of the judge, people would then live in society, without exactly 
knowing the nature of their obligations. 

The judges ought likewise to be of the same rank as the 
accused, or, in other words, his peers ; to the end that he may 
not imagine he is fallen into the hands of persons inclined to 
treat him with rigor. 

If the legislature leaves the executive power in possession 

» As at Athens. 



154 MONTESQUIEU 

of a right to imprison those subjects who can give security for 
their good behavior, there is an end of hberty ; unless they are 
taken up, in order to answer without delay to a capital crime, 
in which case they are really free, being subject only to the 
power of the law. 

But should the legislature think itself in danger by some 
secret conspiracy against the state, or by a correspondence with 
a foreign enemy, it might authorize the executive power, for a 
short and limited time, to imprison suspected persons, who in 
that case would lose their liberty only for a while, to preserve 
it forever. 

And this is the only reasonable method that can be sub- 
stituted to the tyrannical magistracy of the Ephori, and to the 
state inquisitors of Venice, who are also despotic. 

As in a country of liberty, every man who is supposed a free 
agent ought to be his own governor; the legislative power 
should reside in the whole body of the people. But since this 
is impossible in large states, and in small ones is subject to 
many inconveniences, it is fit the people should transact by 
their representatives what they cannot transact by themselves. 

The inhabitants of a particular town are much better ac- 
quainted with its wants and interests than with those of other 
places ; and are better judges of the capacity of their neighbors 
than of that of the rest of their countrymen. The members, 
therefore, of the legislature should not be chosen from the 
general body of the nation ; but it is proper that in every con- 
siderable place a representative should be elected by the in- 
habitants.; 

The great advantage of representatives is, their capacity of 
discussing public affairs. For this the people collectively are 
extremely unfit, which is one of the chief inconveniences of a 
democracy. 

It is not at all necessary that the representatives who have 
received a general instruction from their constituents should 
wait to be directed on each particular affair, as is practised in 
the diets of Germany. True it is that by this way of proceeding 
the speeches of the deputies might with greater propriety be 
called the voice of the nation; but, on the other hand, this 
would occasion infinite delays ; would give each deputy a 

;" See Aristotle, " Polit." III. cap. vii. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 155 

power of controlling the assembly; and, on the most urgent 
and pressing occasions, the wheels of government might be 
scopped by the caprice of a single person. 

When the deputies, as Mr. Sidney well observes, represent 
a body of people, as in Holland, they ought to be accountable 
to their constituents; but it is a different thing in England, 
where they are deputed by boroughs. 

All the inhabitants of the several districts ought to have a 
right of voting at the election of a representative, except such 
as are in so mean a situation as to be deemed to have no will of 
their own. 

One great fault there was in most of the ancient republics, 
that the people had a right to active resolutions, such as re- 
quire some execution, a thing of which they are absolutely 
incapable. They ought to have no share in the government 
but for the choosing of representatives, which is within their 
reach. For though few can tell the exact degree of men's 
capacities, yet there are none but are capable of knowing in 
general whether the person they choose is better qualified than 
most of his neighbors. 

Neither ought the representative body to be chosen for the 
executive part of government, for which it is not so fit ; but 
for the enacting of laws, or to see whether the laws in being 
are duly executed, a thing suited to their abilities, and which 
none indeed but themselves can properly perform. 

In such a state there are always persons distinguished by 
their birth, riches, or honors: but were they to be confounded 
with the common people, and to have only the weight of a sin- 
gle vote like the rest, the common liberty would be their 
slavery, and they would have no interest in supporting it, as 
most of the popular resolutions would be against them. The 
share they have, therefore, in the legislature ought to be pro- 
portioned to their other advantages in the state ; which hap- 
pens only when they form a body that has a right to check 
the licentiousness of the people, as the people have a right to 
oppose any encroachment of theirs. 

The legislative power is therefore committed to the body of 
the nobles, and to that which represents the people, each hav- 
ing their asseml)lies and deliberations apart, each their sepa- 
rate views and interests. 



156 MONTESQUIEU 

Of the three powers above mentioned, the judiciary is in 
some measure next to nothing: there remain, therefore, only 
two; and as these have need of a regulating power to mod- 
erate them, the part of the legislative body composed of the 
nobility is extremely proper for this purpose. 

The body of the nobility ought to be hereditary. In the 
first place it is so in its own nature; and in the next there 
must be a considerable interest to preserve its privileges — 
privileges that in themselves are obnoxious to popular envy, 
and of course in a free state are always in danger. 

But as a hereditary power might be tempted to pursue its 
own particular interests, and forget those of the people, it is 
proper that where a singular advantage may be gained by 
corrupting the nobility, as in the laws relating to the supplies, 
they should have no other share in the legislation than the 
power of rejecting, and not that of resolving. 

By the power of resolving I mean the right of ordaining 
by their own authority, or of amending what has been or- 
dained by others. By the power of rejecting I would be under- 
stood to mean the right of annulling a resolution taken by an- 
other; which was the power of the tribunes at Rome. And 
though the person possessed of the privilege of rejecting may 
likewise have the right of approving, yet this approbation 
passes for no more than a declaration, that he intends to make 
no use of his privilege of rejecting, and is derived from that 
very privilege. 

The executive power ought to be in the hands of a monarch, 
because this branch of government, having need of despatch, 
is better administered by one than by many : on the other hand, 
whatever depends on the legislative power is oftentimes better 
regulated by many than by a single person. 

But if there were no monarch, and the executive power 
should be committed to a certain number of persons selected 
from the legislative body, there would be an end then of lib- 
erty; by reason the two powers would be united, as the same 
persons would sometimes possess, and would be always able 
to possess, a share in both. 

Were the legislative body to be a considerable time without 
meeting, this would likewise put an end to liberty. For of two 
things one would naturally follow : either that there would b? 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 157 

no longer any legislative resolutions, and then the state would 
fall into anarchy ; or that these resolutions would be taken by 
the executive power, which would render it absolute. 

It would be needless for the legislative body to continue 
always assembled. This would be troublesome to the repre- 
sentatives, and, moreover, would cut out too much work for 
the executive power, so as to take off its attention to its office, 
and oblige it to think only of defending its own prerogatives, 
and the right it has to execute. 

Again, were the legislative body to be always assembled, it 
might happen to be kept up only by falling the places of the 
deceased members with new representatives ; and in that case, 
if the legislative body were once corrupted, the evil would be 
past all remedy. When different legislative bodies succeed 
one another, the people who have a bad opinion of that which 
is actually sitting may reasonably entertain some hopes of the 
next : but were it to be always the same body, the people upon 
seeing it once corrupted would no longer expect any good from 
its laws ; and of course they would either become desperate 
or fall into a state of indolence. 

The legislative body should not meet of itself. For a body 
is supposed to have no will but when it is met; and besides, 
were it not to meet unanimously, it would be impossible to de- 
termine which was really the legislative body ; the part assem- 
bled, or the other. And if it had a right to prorogue itself, it 
might happen never to be prorogued; which would be ex- 
tremely dangerous, in case it should ever attempt to encroach 
on the executive power. Besides, there are seasons, some more 
proper than others, for assembling the legislative body: it is 
fit, therefore, that the executive power should regulate the 
time of meeting, as well as the duration of those assemblies, ac- 
cording to the circumstances and exigencies of a state known 
to itself. 

Were the executive power not to have a right of restraining 
the encroachments of the legislative body, the latter would be- 
come despotic ; for as it might arrogate to itself what authority 
it pleased, it would soon destroy all the other powers. 

But it is not proper, on the other hand, that the legislative 
power should have a right to stay the executive. For as the 
execution has its natural limits, it is useless to confine it ; be- 



158 MONTESQUIEU 

sides, the executive power is generally employed in momentary 
operations. The power, therefore, of the Roman tribunes was 
faulty, as it put a stop not only to the legislation, but likewise 
to the executive part of government ; which was attended with 
infinite mischief. 

But if the legislative power in a free state has no right to 
stay the executive, it has a right and ought to have the means 
of examining in what manner its laws have been executed ; an 
advantage which this government has over that of Crete and 
Sparta, where the Cosmi k and the Ephori I gave no account of 
their administration. 

But whatever may be the issue of that examination, the 
legislative body ought not to have a power of arraigning the 
person, nor, of course, the conduct, of him who is intrusted with 
the executive power. His person should be sacred, because as 
it is necessary for the good of the state to prevent the legislative 
body from rendering themselves arbitrary, the moment he is 
accused or tried there is an end of liberty. 

In this case the state would be no longer a monarchy, but a 
kind of republic, though not a free government. But as the 
person intrusted with the executive power cannot abuse it with- 
out bad counsellors, and such as have the laws as ministers, 
though the laws protect them as subjects, these men may be 
examined and punished — an advantage which this government 
has over that of Gnidus, where the law allowed of no such 
thing as calling the Amymones '« to an account, even after their 
administration ;« and therefore the people could never obtain 
any satisfaction for the injuries done them. 

Though, in general, the judiciary power ought not to be 
united with any part of the legislative, yet this is liable to three 
exceptions, founded on the particular interest of the party ac- 
cused. 

The great are always obnoxious to popular envy ; and were 
they to be judged by the people, they might be in danger from 
their judges, and would, moreover, be deprived of the privilege 
which the meanest subject is possessed of in a free state, of 
being tried by his peers. The nobility, for this reason, ought 

k See Aristotle, " Repub." II. cap. x. n It was lawful to accuse the Roman 

/ Ibid. cap. ix. magistrates after the expiration of their 

m These were magistrates chosen an- several ofifices. See in Dionys. Hali- 

ntially by the people. See Stephen of earn. lib. IX. the affair of Genutius the 

Byzantium. tribune. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 159 

not to be cited before the ordinary courts of judicature, but 
before that part of the legislature which is composed of their 
own body. 

It is possible that the law, which is clear sighted in one 
sense, and blind in another, might, in some cases, be too severe. 
But as we have already observed, the national judges are no 
more than the mouth that pronounces the words of the law, 
mere passive beings, incapable of moderating either its force 
or rigor. That part, therefore, of the legislative body, which 
we have just now observed to be a necessary tribunal on an- 
other occasion, also is a necessary tribunal in this ; it belongs 
to its supreme authority to moderate the law in favor of the 
law itself, by mitigating the sentence. 

It might also happen that a subject intrusted with the admin- 
istration of public affairs may infringe the rights of the people, 
and be guilty of crimes which the ordinary magistrates either 
could not or would not punish. But, in general, the legislative 
power cannot try causes : and much less can it try this partic- 
ular case, where it represents the party aggrieved, which is the 
people. It can only, therefore, impeach. But before what 
court shall it bring its impeachment ? Must it go and demean 
itself before the ordinary tribunals, which are its inferiors, and, 
being composed, moreover, of men who are chosen from the 
people as well as itself, will naturally be swayed by the author- 
ity of so powerful an accuser ? No : in order to preserve the 
dignity of the people and the security of the subject, the legis- 
lative part which represents the people must bring in its charge 
before the legislative part which represents the nobility, who 
have neither the same interests nor the same passions. 

Here is an advantage which this government has over most 
of the ancient republics, where this abuse prevailed, that the 
people were at the same time both judge and accuser. 

The executive power, pursuant of what has been already 
said, ought to have a share in the legislature by the power of 
rejecting; otherwise it would soon be stripped of its preroga- 
tive. But should the legislative power usurp a share of the 
executive, the latter would be equally undone. 

If the prince were to have a part in the legislature by the 
power of resolving, liberty would be lost. But as it is neces- 
sary he should have a share in the legislature for the support 



i6o MONTESQUIEU 

of his own prerogative, this share must consist in the power of 
rejecting. 

Tlie change of government at Rome was owing to this, that 
neither the senate, who had one part of the executive power, 
nor the magistrates, who were intrusted with the other, had 
the right of rejecting, which was entirely lodged in the people. 

Here, then, is the fundamental constitution of the govern- 
ment we are treating of. The legislative body being composed 
of two parts, they check one another by the mutual privilege of 
rejecting. They are both restrained by the executive power, as 
the executive is by the legislative. 

These three powers should naturally form a state of repose 
or inaction. But as there is a necessity for movement in the 
course of human affairs, they are forced to move, but still in 
concert. 

As the executive power has no other part in the legislative 
than the privilege of rejecting, it can have no share in the 
public debates. It is not even necessary that it should propose, 
because as it may always disapprove of the resolutions that 
shall be taken, it may likewise reject the decisions on those pro- 
posals which were made against its will. 

In some ancient commonwealths, where public debates were 
carried on by the people in a body, it was natural for the execu- 
tive power to propose and debate in conjunction with the peo- 
ple, otherwise their resolutions must have been attended with 
a strange confusion. 

Were the executive power to determine the raising of public 
money, otherwise than by giving its consent, liberty would be 
at an end ; because it would become legislative in the most im- 
portant point of legislation. 

If the legislative power was to settle the subsidies, not from 
year to year, but forever, it would run the risk of losing its 
liberty, because the executive power would be no longer de- 
pendent ; and when once it was possessed of such a perpetual 
right, it would be a matter of indifiference whether it held it of 
itself or of another. The same may be said if it should come to 
a resolution of intrusting, not an annual, but a perpetual com- 
mand of the fleets and armies to the executive power. 

To prevent the executive power from being able to oppress, 
it is requisite that the armies with which it is intrusted should 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS i6i 

consist of the people, and have the same spirit as the people, 
as was the case at Rome till the time of Marius. To obtain 
this end, there are only two ways, either that the persons em- 
ployed in the army should have sufficient property to answer 
for their conduct to their fellow-subjects, and be enlisted only 
for a year, as was customary at Rome ; or if there should be a 
standing army, composed chiefly of the most despicable part 
of the nation, the legislative power should have a right to dis- 
band them as soon as it pleased; the soldiers should live in 
common with the rest of the people ; and no separate camp, 
barracks, or fortress should be suffered. 

When once an army is established, it ought not to depend 
immediately on the legislative, but on the executive power; 
and this from the very nature of the thing, its business con- 
sisting more in action than in deliberation. 

It is natural for mankind to set a higher value upon courage 
than timidity, on activity than prudence, on strength than 
counsel. Hence the army will ever despise a senate, and re- 
spect their own officers. They will naturally slight the orders 
sent them by a body of men whom they look upon as cowards, 
and therefore unworthy to command them. So that as soon 
as the troops depend entirely on the legislative body, it be- 
comes a military government ; and if the contrary has ever 
happened, it has been owing to some extraordinary circum- 
stances. It is because the army was always kept divided ; it is 
because it was composed of several bodies that depended each 
on a particular province : it is because the capital towns were 
strong places, defended by their natural situation, and not gar- 
risoned with regular troops. Holland, for instance, is still safer 
than Venice ; she might drown or starve the revolted troops ; 
for as they are not quartered in towns capable of furnishing 
them with necessary subsistence, this subsistence is of course 
precarious. 

Tn perusing the admirable treatise of Tacitus " On tlie Man- 
ners of the Germans," o we find it is from that nation the Eng- 
lish have borrowed the idea of their political government. This 
beautiful system was invented first in the woods. 

As all human things have an end. the state we are speaking 

De minorihus rebus principcs con- arliitrium est, apud principes perttac- 
Eultant de majoribus omnes; ita tamcn tcntur. 
Ut ea quoque quorum penes plebem 

Vol. T.— it 



i62 MONTESQUIEU 

of will lose its liberty, will perish. Have not Rome, Sparta, and 
Carthage perished ? It will perish when the legislative power 
shall be more corrupt than the executive. 

It is not my business to examine whether the English actu- 
ally enjoy this liberty or not. Sufficient it is for my purpose to 
observe that it is established by their laws ; and I inquire no 
further. 

Neither do I pretend by this to undervalue other govern- 
ments, nor to say that this extreme political liberty ought to 
give uneasiness to those who have only a moderate share of it. 
How should I have any such design, I who think that even the 
highest refinement of reason is not always desirable, and that 
mankind generally find their account better in mediums than 
in extremes ? 

Harrington, in his " Oceana," has also inquired into the ut- 
most degree of liberty to which the constitution of a state may 
be carried. But of him, indeed, it may be said that for want of 
knowing the nature of real liberty he busied himself in pursuit 
of an imaginary one ; and that he built a Chalcedon, though he 
had a Byzantium before his eyes. 

7. — Of the Monarchies ive are acquainted with 

The monarchies we are acquainted with have not, like that 
we have been speaking of, liberty for their direct view: the 
only aim is the glory of the subject, of the state, and of the 
sovereign. But hence there results a spirit of liberty, which 
in those states is capable of achieving as great things, and of 
contributing as much, perhaps, to happiness, as liberty itself. 

Here the three powers are not distributed and founded on 
the model of the constitution above mentioned ; they have each 
a particular distribution, according to which they border more 
or less on political liberty ; and if they did not border upon it, 
monarchy would degenerate into despotic government. 

8. — Why the Ancients had not a clear Idea of Motmrchy 

The ancients had no notion of a government founded on a 
body of nobles, and much less on a legislative body composed 
of the representatives of the people. The republics of Greece 
and Italy were cities that had each their own form of govern- 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 163 

ment, and convened their subjects within their walls. Before 
Rome had swallowed up all the other republics, there was 
scarcely anywhere a king to be found, no, not in Italy, Gaul, 
Spain, or Germany;/' they were all petty states or republics. 
Even Africa itself was subject to a great commonwealth : and 
Asia Minor was occupied by Greek colonies. There was, there- 
fore, no instance of deputies of towns or assemblies of the 
states ; one must have gone as far as Persia to find a monarchy. 

I am not ignorant that there were confederate republics ; in 
which several towns sent deputies to an assembly. But I affirm 
there was no monarchy on that model. 

The first plan, therefore, of the monarchies we are acquainted 
with was thus formed. The German nations that conquered 
the Roman Empire were certainly a free people. Of this we 
may be convinced only by reading Tacitus " On the Manners 
of the Germans." The conquerors spread themselves over all 
the country; living mostly in the fields, and very little in 
towns. When they were in Germany, the whole nation was 
able to assemble. This they could no longer do, when dis- 
persed through the conquered provinces. And yet as it was 
necessary that the nation should deliberate on public affairs, 
pursuant to their usual method before the conquest, they had 
recourse to representatives. Such is the origin of the Gothic 
government amongst us. At first it was mixed with aristoc- 
racy and monarchy — a mixture attended with this inconven- 
ience, that the common people were bondmen. The custom 
afterwards succeeded of granting letters of enfranchisement, 
and was soon followed by so perfect a harmony between the 
civil liberty of the people, the privileges of the nobility and 
clergy, and the prince's prerogative, that I really think there 
never was in the world a government so well tempered as that 
of each part of Europe, so long as it lasted. Surprising that the 
corruption of the government of a conquering nation should 
have given birth to the best species of constitution that could 
possibly be imagined by man ! 

p Nevertheless, during the same epoch there were kings in Macedonia, Syria, 
Egypt, etc— Cr^vier. 



1 64 MONTESQUIEU 

9. — Aristotle's Marnier of Thinking 

Aristotle is greatly puzzled in treating of monarchy .a He 
makes live species ; and he does not distinguish them by the 
form of constitution, but by things merely accidental, as the 
virtues and vices of the prince ; or by things extrinsic, such as 
tyranny usurped or inherited. 

Among the number of monarchies he ranks the Persian Em- 
pire and the Kingdom of Sparta. But is it not evident that the 
one was a despotic state and the other a republic ? 

The ancients, who were strangers to the distribution of the 
three powers in the government of a single person, could never 
form a just idea of monarchy. 

10. — What other Politicians thought 

To temper monarchy, Arybas,^ King of Epirus,^ found no 
other remedy than a republic. The Molossi, not knowing how 
to limit the same power, made two kings,^ by which means the 
state was weakened more than the prerogative ; they wanted 
rivals, and they created enemies. 

Two kings were tolerable nowhere but at Sparta ; here they 
did not form, but were only a part of, the constitution. 

II. — Of the Kings of the heroic Times of Greece 

In the heroic times of Greece, a kind of monarchy arose 
that was not of long duration-^" Those who had been inventors 
of arts, who had fought in their country's cause, who had es- 
tablished societies, or distributed lands among the people, ob- 
tained the regal power, and transmitted it to their children. 
They were kings, priests, and judges. This was one of the five 
species of monarchy mentioned by Aristotle ;f and the only one 
that can give us any idea of the monarchical constitution. But 
the plan of this constitution is opposite to that of our modern 
monarchies. 

The three powers were there distributed in such a manner 

(i"Polit." book TIT. chap. xiv. d Arist. " Polit." book V. chap. viii. 

b Notwithstanding the fact that Ary- Montesquieu seems to have miscon- 

bas sought to render his monarchy strued Aristotle, since the Molossi never 

more stable, the kings of Epirus re- had but one king. — P. 

tained their power until overthrown by c Ibid., book ill. chap. xiv. 

Paulus yEmilius.— D. / Ibid.. 

c See Justin, book XVII. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 165 

that the people were the legislature,? and the king had the 
executive together with the judiciary power; whereas in mod- 
ern monarchies the prince is invested with the executive and 
legislative powers, or at least with part of the legislative, but 
does not act in a judiciary capacity. 

In the government of the kings of the heroic times, the three 
powers were ill distributed. Hence those monarchies could 
not long subsist. For as soon as the people got the legislative 
power into their hands, they might, as they everywhere did, 
upon the very least caprice, subvert the regal authority. 

Among a free people possessed of the legislative power, and 
enclosed within walls, where everything tending towards op- 
pression appears still more odious, it is the masterpiece of legis- 
lation to know where to place properly the judiciary power. 
But it could not be in worse hands than in those of the person 
to whom the executive power had been already committed. 
From that very instant the monarch became terrible. But at 
the same time as he had no share in the legislature, he could 
make no defence against it ; thus his power was in one sense 
too great, in another too little. 

They had not as yet discovered that the true function of a 
prince was to appoint judges, and not to sit as judge himself. 
The opposite policy rendered the government of a single per- 
son insupportable. Hence all these kings were banished. The 
Greeks had no notion of the proper distribution of the three 
powers in the government of one person ; they could see it only 
in that of many ; and this kind of constitution they distin- 
guished by the name of Polity./^ 

12. — Of the Government of the Kings of Rome, and in what 
Manner the three Pozvers were there distributed 

The government of the kings of Rome had some relation to 
that of the kings of the heroic times of Greece. Its subver- 
sion, like the latter's, was owing to its general defect, though 
in its own particular nature it was exceedingly good. 

In order to give an adequate idea of this government, I shall 
distinguish that of the first five kings, that of Servius Tullius, 
and that of Tarquin. 

g See what Plutarch says in the " T-ife h Aristot. " Polit." book IV. chapi 

of Theseus." See likewise " Thucy- viii. 
dides," book I. 



i66 



MONTESQUIEU 



The crown was elective, and under the first five kings the 
Senate had the greatest share in the election. 

Upon the king's decease the Senate examined whether they 
should continue the established form of government. If they 
thought proper to continue it, they named a magistrate i taken 
from their own body, who chose a king ; the senate were to ap- 
prove of the election, the people to confirm it, and the augurs 
to declare the approbation of the gods. If any of these three 
conditions was wanting, they were obliged to proceed to an- 
other election. 

The constitution was a mixture of monarchy, aristocracy, 
and democracy ; and such was the harmony of power, that there 
was no instance of jealousy or dispute in the first reigns. The 
king commanded the armies, and had the direction of the sacri- 
fices : he had the power of determining ; civil and criminal k 
causes ; he called the Senate together, convened the people, 
laid some affairs before the latter, and regulated the rest with 
the senate.^ 

The authority of the senate was very great. The kings often- 
times pitched upon senators with whom they sat in judgment ; 
and they never laid any afifair before the people till it had been 
previously debated w in that august assembly. 

The people had the right of choosing n magistrates, of con- 
senting to the new laws, and, with the king's permission, of 
making war and peace ; but they had not the judicial power. 
When Tullius Hostilius referred the trial of Horatius to the 
people, he had his particular reasons, which may be seen in 
Dionysius Halicarnassus.o 

The constitution altered under P Servius Tullius. The Sen- 
ate had no share in his election ; he caused himself to be pro- 
claimed by the people ; he resigned the power of hearing civil 
causes,? reserving none to himself but those of a criminal nat- 



i Dionys. Halicarn. book II. p. 120, 
and book IV. pp. 242 and 243. 

j See Tanaquil's " Discourse on 
Livy," book I. dec. i, and the regula- 
tions of Servius Tullius in Dionys. 
Halicarn. book IV. p. 229. 

k See Dionys. Halicarn. book II. p. 
118, and book III. p. 171. 

/ It was by virtue of a senatus-con- 
sultum that Tullius Hostilius ordered 
Alba to be destroyed.— Dionys. Hali- 
carn. book III. pp. 167 and 172. 

m Ibid, book IV. p. 276. 



n Ibid., book II. And yet they could 
not have the nomination of all offices, 
since Valerius Publicola made that fa- 
mous law by which every citizen was 
forbidden to exercise any employment, 
unless he had obtained it by the suffrage 
of the people. 

o Book III. p. 159. 

P Ibid., book IV. 

g He divested himself of half the regal 
power, says Dionys. Halicarn. book IV. 
p. 229. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 167 

ure ; he laid all affairs directly before the people, eased them of 
the taxes, and imposed the whole burden on the patricians. 
Hence in proportion as he weakened the regal together with 
the senatorian power, he augmented that of the plebeians.^ 

Tarquin would neither be chosen by the Senate nor by the 
people ; he considered Servius Tullius as a usurper, and seized 
the crown as his hereditary right. He destroyed most of the 
senators ; those who remained he never consulted ; nor did he 
even so much as summon them to assist at his decisions.&lt;y Thus 
his power increased : but the odium of that power received a 
new addition, by usurping also the authority of the people, 
against whose consent he enacted several laws. The three 
powers were by these means reunited in his person ; but the 
people at a critical minute recollected that they were legislators, 
and there was an end of Tarquin, 

113. — General Rejections on the State of Rome after the 
Expulsion of its Kings 

It is impossible to be tired of so agreeable a subject as an- 
cient Rome : thus strangers at present leave the modern pal- 
aces of that celebrated capital to visit the ruins ; and thus the 
eye, after recreating itself with the view of flowery meads, is 
pleased with the wild prospect of rocks and mountains. 

The patrician families were at all times possessed of great 
privileges. These distinctions, which were considerable under 
the kings, became much more important after their expulsion. 
Hence arose the jealousy of the plebeians, who wanted to re- 
duce them. The contest struck at the constitution, without 
weakening the government ; for it was very indifferent as to 
what family were the magistrates, provided the magistracy pre- 
served its authority. 

An elective monarchy, like that of Rome, necessarily sup- 
poses a powerful aristocratic body to support it, without which 
it changes immediately into tyranny or into a popular state. 
But a popular state has no need of this distinction of families to 
maintain itself. To this it was owing that the patricians, who 
were a necessary part of the constitution under the regal gov- 

r It was tliought tlifit if he had not have established a popular government. 
been prevented by Tarquin he would — Dionvs. Ilalicarn. book IV. p. 243. 

5 Ibid., book IV. 



i68 MONTESQUIEU 

ernment, became a superfluous branch under the consuls ; the 
people could suppress them without hurting themselves, and 
change the constitution without corrupting it. 

After Servius Tullius had reduced the patricians, it was nat- 
ural that Rome should fall from the regal hands into those of 
the people. But the people had no occasion to be afraid of 
relapsing under a regal power by reducing the patricians. 

A state may alter in two different ways, either by the amend- 
ment or by the corruption of the constitution. If it has pre- 
served its principles and the constitution changes, this is owing 
to its amendment ; if upon changing the constitution its princi- 
ples are lost, this is because it has been corrrupted. 

The government of Rome, after the expulsion of the kings, 
should naturally have been a democracy. The people had al- 
ready the legislative power in their hands ; it was their unani- 
mous consent that had expelled the Tarquins ; and if they had 
not continued steady to those principles, the Tarquins might 
easily have been restored. To pretend that their design in ex- 
pelling them was to render themselves slaves to a few families 
is quite absurd. The situation therefore of things required that 
Rome should have formed a democracy, and yet this did not 
happen. There was a necessity that the power of the principal 
families should be tempered, and that the laws should have a 
bias to democracy. 

The prosperity of states is frequently greater in the insensi- 
ble transition from one constitution to another than in either 
of those constitutions. Then it is that all the springs of gov- 
ernment are upon the stretch, that the citizens assert their 
claims, that friendships or enmities are formed amongst the 
jarring parties, and that there is a noble emulation between 
those who defend the ancient and those who are strenuous in 
promoting the new constitution, 

14- — Jn zvhat Manner the Distribution of the three Powers 
began to change after the Expulsion of the Kings 

There were four things that greatly prejudiced the liberty of 
Rome. The patricians had engrossed to themselves all public 
employments whatever; an exorbitant power was annexed to 
the consulate; the people were often insulted; and, in fine, 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 169 

they had scarcely any influence at all left in the public suffrages. 
These four abuses were redressed by the people. 

1st. It was regulated that the plebeians might aspire to 
some magistracies ; and by degrees they were rendered capable 
of them all, except that of Inter-rex. 

2d. The consulate was dissolved into several other magis- 
tracies ; i pretors were created, on whom the power was con- 
ferred of trying private causes ; questors « were nominated for 
determining those of a criminal nature ; ediles were established 
for the civil administration ; treasurers a were made for the 
management of the public money ; and, in fine, by the creation 
of censors the consuls were divested of that part of the legisla- 
tive power which regulates the morals of the citizens and the 
transient polity of the different bodies of the state. The chief 
privileges left them were, to preside in the great meetings b of 
the people, to assemble the Senate, and to command the armies. 

3d. The sacred laws appointed tribunes, who had a power 
of checking the encroachments of the patricians, and prevented 
not only private but likewise public injuries. 

In fine the plebeians increased their influence in the general 
assemblies. The people of Rome were divided in three different 
manners — by centuries, by ciirice, and by tribes ; and when- 
ever they gave their votes, they were convened in one of those 
three ways. 

In the first the patricians, the leading men, the rich, and the 
Senate, which was very nearly the same thing, had almost the 
whole authority ; in the second they had less ; and less still in 
the third. 

The division into centuries was a division rather of estates 
and fortunes than of persons. The whole people were dis- 
tributed into a hundred and ninety-three centuries,c which had 
each a single vote. The patricians and leading men composed 
the first nine-eight centuries ; and the other nine-five con- 
sisted of the remainder of the citizens. In this division there- 
fore the patricians were masters of the suffrages. 

In the division into curicc,d the patricians had not the same 
advantages ; some, however, they had, for it was necessary to 

( Livy, dec. i, book VI. b Comitiis centuriatis. 

M " Qujestores parricidii."— Pomponi- c Sec Livy, hook I.; Dionys. Halicarn. 

us, lesr. 2 ff. " de Orip;. Jur." books IV. and VIT. 
a Plutarch, " Life of I'ublicola." d Dionys. Halicarn. book IX. p. 598. 



I70 MONTESQUIEU 

consult the augurs, who were under the direction of the patri- 
cians ; and no proposal could be made there to the people un- 
less it had been previously laid before the senate, and approved 
of by a senatus-consiiltmn. But, in the division into tribes they 
had nothing to do either with the augurs or with the decrees of 
the Senate ; and the patricians were excluded. 

Now the people endeavored constantly to have those meet- 
ings by airicc which had been customary by centuries, and by 
tribes those they used to have before by curice; by which 
means the direction of public affairs soon devolved from the 
patricians to the plebeians. 

Thus when the plebeians obtained the power of trying the 
patricians — a power which commenced in the affair of Corio- 
lanus,** they insisted upon assembling by tribes,^ and not by 
centuries ; and when the new magistracies g of tribunes and 
ediles were established in favor of the people, the latter ob- 
tained that they should meet by cnricc in order to nominate 
them ; and after their power was quite settled, they gained h 
so far their point as to assemble by tribes to proceed to this 
nomination. 

15- — Jn what Manner Rome, in the nourishing State of that 
Republic, suddenly lost its Liberty 

In the heat of the contests between the patricians and the 
plebeians, the latter insisted upon having fixed laws, to the 
end that the public judgments should no longer be the effect 
of capricious will or arbitrary power. The Senate, after a great 
deal of resistance, acquiesced ; and decemvirs were nominated 
to compose those laws. It was thought proper to grant them 
an extraordinary power, because they were to give laws to 
parties whose views and interest it was almost impossible to 
unite. The nomination of all magistrates was suspended ; and 
the decemvirs were chosen in the comitia sole administrators 
of the republic. Thus they found themselves invested with the 
consular and the tribunitial power. By one they had the 
privilege of assembling the senate, by the other that of con- 
vening the people ; but they assembled neither Senate nor peo- 

f Dionys. Halicarn. book VIT. ^ Dionys. Halicarn. book V. pp. 410 

f Contrary to the ancient custom, as and 411. 

may be seen in Dionys. Halicarn. book It Ibid, book IX. p. 650. 
V. p. 320. • 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 171 

pie. Ten men only of the republic had the whole legislative, 
the whole executive, and the whole judiciary power. Rome 
saw herself enslaved by as cruel a tyranny as that of Tarquin. 
When Tarquin trampled on the liberty of that city, she was 
seized with indignation at the power he had usurped ; when 
the decemvirs exercised every act of oppression, she was as- 
tonished at the extraordinary power she had granted. 

What a strange system of tyranny — a tyranny carried on by 
men who had obtained the political and military power, merely 
from their knowledge in civil affairs, and who at that very junc- 
ture stood in need of the courage of those citizens to protect 
them abroad who so tamely submitted to domestic oppression ! 

The spectacle of Virginia's death, whom her father immo- 
lated to chastity and liberty, put an end to the power of the 
decemvirs. Every man became free, because every man had 
been injured ; each showed himself a citizen, because each had 
a tie of the parent. The senate and the people resumed a 
liberty which had been committed to ridiculous tyrants. 

No people were so easily moved by public spectacles as the 
Romans. That of the impurpled body of Lucretia put an end 
to the regal government. The debtor who appeared in the 
Forum covered with wounds caused an alteration in the repub- 
lic. The decemvirs owed their expulsion to the tragedy of Vir- 
ginia. To condemn Manlius, it was necessary to keep the peo- 
ple from seeing the Capitol. Caesar's bloody garment flung 
Rome again into slavery. 

16. — Of the legislative Pozver in the Roman Republic 

There were no rights to contest under the decemvirs : but 
upon the restoration of liberty, jealousies revived ; and so long 
as the patricians had any privileges left, they were sure to be 
stripped of them by the plebeians. 

The mischief would not have been so great had the plebeians 
been satisfied with this success ; but they also injured the pa- 
tricians as citizens. When the people assembled by cnricc or 
centuries, they were composed of senators, patricians, and ple- 
beians ; in their disputes the plebeians gained this point,?' that 
they alone without patricians or senate should enact the laws 

i Dionys. Halicarn. book XI. p. 725. 



172 



MONTESQUIEU 



called Plebiscita ; and the assemblies in which they were made 
had the name of comitia by tribes. Thus there were cases in 
which the patricians ; had no share in the legislative power, 
but k were subject to the legislation of another body of the 
state. This was the extravagance of liberty. The people, to 
establish a democracy, acted against the very principles of that 
government. One would have imagined that so exorbitant a 
power must have destroyed the authority of the senate. But 
Rome had admirable institutions. Two of these were espe- 
cially remarkable : one by which the legislative power of the 
people was established, and the other by which it was limited. 

The censors, and before them the consuls, modelled I and 
created, as it were, every five years, the body of the people ; 
they exercised the legislation on the very part that was pos- 
sessed of the legislative power. " Tiberius Gracchus," says 
Cicero, " caused the freedmen to be admitted into the tribes, 
not by the force of his eloquence, but by a word, by a gesture ; 
which had he not effected, the republic, whose drooping head 
we are at present scarcely able to uphold, would not even exist." 

On the other hand, the senate had the power of rescuing, as 
it were, the republic out of the hands of the people, by creating 
a dictator, before whom the sovereign bowed his head, and the 
most popular laws were silent.^ 

17. — Of the executive Power in the same Republic 

Jealous as the people were of their legislative power, they 
had no great uneasiness about the executive. This they left 
almost entirely to the senate and to the consuls, reserving 
scarcely anything more to themselves than the right of choos- 
ing the magistrates, and of confirming the acts of the senate 
and of the generals. 

Rome, whose passion was to command, whose ambition was 



;' By the sacred laws, the plebeians 
had the power of making the plebiscita 
by themselves, without admitting the 
patricians into their assembly. — Dionys. 
Halicarn. book VI. p. 410, and book 
VII. p. 430. 

k By the law enacted after the expul- 
sion of the decemvirs, the patricians 
were made subject to the plebiscita, 
though they had not a right of voting 
there. Livy, book III. and Dionys. 



Halicarn. book XI. p. 725. This law 
was confirmed by that of Publius Philo 
the dictator, in the year of Rome 416. 
Livy, book VIII. 

/ In the year 312 of Rome the consuls 
performed still the business of survey- 
ing the people and their estates, as ap- 
pears by Dionys. Halicarn. book XI. 

m Such as those by which it was al- 
lowed to appeal from the decisions of all 
the magistrates to the people. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 173 

to conquer, whose commencement and progress were one con- 
tinued usurpation, had constantly affairs of the greatest weight 
upon her hands ; her enemies were ever conspiring against her, 
or she against her enemies. 

As she was obhged to behave on the one hand with heroic 
courage, and on the other with consummate prudence, it was 
requisite, of course, that the management of affairs should be 
committed to the senate. Thus the people disputed every 
branch of the legislative power with the senate, because they 
were jealous of their liberty; but they had no disputes about 
the executive, because they were animated with the love of 
glory. 

So great was the share the senate took in the executive 
power, that, as Polybius n informs us, foreign nations imagined 
that Rome was an aristocracy. The senate disposed of the 
public money, and farmed out the revenue ; they were arbiters 
of the affairs of their allies ; they determined war or peace, and 
directed in this respect the consuls ; they fixed the number of 
the Roman and of the allied troops, disposed of the provinces 
and armies to the consuls or pretors, and upon the expiration 
of the year of command had the power of appointing succes- 
sors ; they decreed triumphs, received and sent embassies : they 
nominated, rewarded, punished, and were judges of kings, de- 
clared them allies of the Roman people, or stripped them of 
that title. 

The consuls levied the troops which they were to carry into 
the field ; had the command of the forces by sea and by land ; 
disposed of the forces of the allies ; were invested with the 
whole power of the republic in the provinces ; gave peace to 
the vanquished nations, imposed conditions on them, or re- 
ferred them to the senate. 

In the earliest times, when the people had some share in the 
affairs relating to war or peace, they exercised rather their leg- 
islative than their executive power. They scarcely did any- 
thing else but confirm the acts of the kings, and after their ex- 
pulsion those of the consuls or senate. So far were they from 
being the arbiters of war, that we have instances of its having 
been often declared, notwithstanding the opposition of the trib- 
unes. But growing wanton in their prosperity, they increased 

nBook VI. 



174 



MONTESQUIEU 



their executive power. Thus o they created the military trib- 
unes, the nomination of whom till then had belonged to the 
generals; and some time before the first Punic war, they de- 
creed that only their own body should have the right of declar- 
ing war./' 

1 8. — Of the judiciary Power in the Roman Government 

The Judiciary power was given to the people, to the senate, 
to the magistrates, and to particular judges. We must see in 
what manner it was distributed; beginning with their civil 
affairs. 

The consuls had the judiciary power q after the expulsion of 
the kings, as the pretors were judges after the consuls. Servius 
Tullius had divested himself of the power of determining civil 
causes, which was not resumed by the consuls, except in some r 
very rare cases, for that reason called extraordinary.^ They 
were satisfied with naming the judges, and establishing the 
several tribunals. By a discourse of Appius Claudius, in 
Dionysius Halicarnassus,^ it appears that as early as the 259th 
year of Rome this was looked upon as a settled custom among 
the Romans ; and it is not tracing it very high to refer it to 
Servius Tullius. 

Every year the pretor made a list a of such as he chose for 
the office of judges during his magistracy. A sufficient num- 
ber was pitched upon for each cause ; a custom very nearly the 
same as that now practised in England. And what was ex- 
tremely favorable to liberty b was the pretor's fixing the judges 
with the consent c of the parties. The great number of excep- 
tions that can be made in England amounts pretty nearly to 
this very custom. 



o In the year of Rome 444, Livy, dec. 
r, book IX. As the war against Perseus 
appeared somewhat dangerous, it was 
ordained by a senatus-consultum that 
this law should be suspended, and the 
people agreed to it. Livy, dec. 5, book 

p They extorted it from the Senate, 
says Freinshemius, dec. 2, book VI. 

q There is no manner of doubt but 
the consuls had the power of trying 
civil causes before the creation of the 
pretors. See T-ivy, dec. i, book II. p. 
19; Dionys. ITalicarn. book X. p. 627, 
and the same book, p. 645. 

rThe tribunes frequently tried causes 
by themselves only, but nothing ren- 



dered them more odious. — Dionys. Hali- 
carn. book XI. p. 709. _ 

5 Tudicia extraordinaria. See the " In- 
stitutes," book IV. 

t Book VI. p. 360. 

a Album Judicium. 

b " Our ancestors," says Cicero, pro 
Cluentio, " would not suffer any man 
whom the parties had not agreed to to 
be judge of the least pecuniary affair, 
much less of a citizen's reputation." 

c See in the fragments of the Servilian, 
Cornelian, and other laws, in what man- 
ner these laws appointed judgjes for the 
crimes they proposed to punish. They 
were often pitched upon by choice, 
sometimes by lot, or, in fine, by lot 
mixed together with choice. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 175 

The judges decided only the questions relating to matter of 
fact ; d for example, whether a sum of money had been paid or 
not, whether an act had been committed or not. But as to 
questions of law,&lt;? as these required a certain capacity, they 
were always carried before the tribunal of the centumvirs.^ 

The kings reserved to themselves the judgment of criminal 
affairs, and in this were succeeded by the consuls. It was in 
consequence of this authority that Brutus put his children and 
all those who were concerned in the Tarquinian conspiracy to 
death. This was an exorbitant power. The consuls already 
invested with the military command extended the exercise of 
it even to civil affairs ; and their procedures, being stripped of 
all forms of justice, were rather exertions of violence than legal 
judgments. 

This gave rise to the Valerian law, by which it was made 
lawful to appeal to the people from every decision of the con- 
suls that endangered the life of a citizen. The consuls had no 
longer the power of pronouncing sentence in capital cases 
against a Roman citizen, without the consent of the people.^ 

We see in the first conspiracy for the restoration of the Tar- 
quins that the criminals were tried by Brutus the consul ; in 
the second the senate and comitia were assembled to try them./t 

The laws distinguished by the name of sacred allowed the 
plebeians the privilege of choosing tribunes ; whence was 
formed a body whose pretensions at first were immense. It is 
hard to determine which was greater, the insolence of the ple- 
beians in demanding, or the condescension of the senate in 
granting. The Valerian law allowed appeals to the people, 
that is, to the people composed of senators, patricians, and ple- 
beians. The plebeians made a law that appeals should be 
brought before their own body. A question was soon after 
started, whether the plebeians had a right to try a patrician ; 
this was the subject of a dispute to which the impeachment of 
Coriolanus gave rise, and which ended with that affair. When 
Coriolanus was accused by the tribunes before the people, he 

d Seneca, " de Bcnefic." lib. II. cap. g " Ouoniam de capite civis Komani, 

vii. in fine. _ injussu populi Romani, nnn erat per- 

e See Ouintilian, lib. IV. p. 54, in fol. missum consulibus jus dicere." — See 
edit, of Paris, 1^41. Pomponius, Lep. 2 ff. " de Orig. Jur." 

f Leg. 2 ff. de Orig. Jur." Mapis- /i Dionys. Halicarn. book V. p. 322. 

trates who were called decemvirs pre- 
sided in court, the whole under a pre- 
tor's direction. 



176 MONTESQUIEU 

insisted, contrary to the spirit of the Valerian law, that as he 
was a patrician, none but the consuls had the power to try 
him ; on the other hand, the plebeians, also contrary to the 
spirit of that same law, pretended that none but their body were 
empowered to be his judges, and accordingly they pronounced 
sentence upon him. 

This was moderated by the law of the Twelve Tables ; where- 
by it was ordained that none but the great assemblies of the 
people i should try a citizen in capital cases. Hence the body 
of the plebeians, or, which amounts to the very same, the 
comitia by tribes, had no longer any power of hearing criminal 
causes, except such as were punished with fines. To inflict a 
capital punishment a law was requisite ; but to condemn to a 
pecuniary mulct, there was occasion only for a plebiscitum. 

This regulation of the law of the Twelve Tables was ex- 
tremely prudent. It produced an admirable balance between 
the body of the plebeians and the senate. For as the full ju- 
diciary power of both depended on the greatness of the punish- 
ment and the nature of the crime, it was necessary they should 
both agree. 

The Valerian law abolished all the remains of the Roman 
government in any way relating to that of the kings of the 
heroic times of Greece. The consuls were divested of the 
power to punish crimes. Though all crimes are public, yet we 
must distinguish between those which more nearly concern 
the mutual intercourse of the citizens and those which more 
immediately interest the state in the relation it bears to its 
subjects. The first are called private, the second public. The 
latter were tried by the people ; and in regard to the former, 
they named by particular commission a questor for the prosecu- 
tion of each crime. The person chosen by the people was fre- 
quently one of the magistrates, sometimes a private man. He 
was called the questor of parricide, and is mentioned in the law 
of the Twelve Tables./ 

The questor nominated the judge of the question, who drew 
lots for the judges, and regulated the tribunal in which he 
presided.^ 

i The comitia by centuries. Thus k See a fragment of Ulpian, who gives 

Manlius Capitolinus was tried in these another of the Cornehan law: it is to be 

comitia.— Livy, dec. 1, book VI. p. 60. met with in the Collation of the Mosaic 

; Pomponius, in the second Law in and Roman Laws, tit. i, de sicariis et 

the Digest " de Grig. Jur." homicidiis. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 177 

Here it is proper to observe what share the senate liad in the 
nomination of the questor, that we may see how far the two 
powers were balanced. Sometimes the senate caused a dicta- 
tor to be chosen, in order to exercise the office of questor ; I at 
other times they ordained that the people should be convened 
by a tribune, with the view of proceeding to the norrmation of 
a questor : m and, in fine, the people frequently appointed a 
magistrate to make his report to the senate concerning a par- 
ticular crime, and to desire them to name a questor, as may be 
seen in the judgment upon Lucius Scipio » in Livy.o 

In the year of Rome 604, some of these commissions were 
rendered permanent./' All criminal causes were gradually di- 
vided into different parts ; to which they gave the name of per- 
petual questions. Different pretors were created, to each of 
whom some of those questions were assigned. They had a 
power conferred upon them for the term of a year, of trying 
such criminal causes as bore any relation to those questions, 
and then they were sent to govern their province. 

At Carthage the senate of the hundred was composed of 
judges who enjoyed that dignity for life.g But at Rome the 
pretors were annual ; and the judges were not even for so long 
a term, but were nominated for each cause. We have already 
shown in the sixth chapter of this book how favorable this 
regulation was to liberty in particular governments. 

The judges were chosen from the order of senators, till the 
time of the Gracchi. Tiberius Gracchus caused a law to pass 
that they should be taken from the equestrian order ; a change 
so very considerable that the tribune boasted of having cut, 
by one rogation only, the sinews of the senatorian dignity. 

It is necessary to observe that the three powers may be very 
well distributed in regard to the liberty of the constitution, 
though not so well in respect to the liberty of the subject. At 
Rome the people had the greatest share of the legislative, a 
part of the executive, and part of the judiciary power ; by 
which means they had so great a weight in the government as 

/Tin's took place, especially in rcRard &gt;i This judgment was passed in the 

to crimes committed in Italy, which year of Rome 567. 

were subject chiefly to the inspection of o Rook VIII. 

the Senate. See Livy, dec. i, book IX., p Cicero, in " Rruto." 

concerning the conspiracies at Capua. oThis is proved from Livy, book 

wiTliis was the case in the prosccu- XLIII., who says that Hannibal ren- 

tion for the murder of Posthumius, in dcred their magistracy annual. 
the year 340 of Rome. See Livy. 

Vol. L — 12 



178 MONTESQUIEU 

required some other power to balance it. The senate, indeed, 
had part of the executive power, and some share of the legisla- 
tive ; '' but this was not sufficient to counterbalance the weight 
of the people. It was necessary that they should partake of the 
judiciary power: and accordingly they had a share when the 
judges were chosen from among the senators. But when the 
Gracchi deprived the senators of the judicial power,-y the senate 
were no longer able to withstand the people. To favor, there- 
fore, the liberty of the subject, they struck at that of the con- 
stitution ; but the former perished with the latter. 

Infinite were the mischiefs that thence arose. The constitu- 
tion was changed at a time when the fire of civil discord had 
scarcely left any such thing as a constitution. The knights 
ceased to be that middle order which united the people to the 
senate ; and the chain of the constitution was broken. 

There were even particular reasons against transferring the 
judiciary power to the equestrian order. The constitu- 
tion of Rome was founded on this principle, that none should 
be enlisted as soldiers but such as were men of sufficient prop- 
erty to answer for their conduct to the republic. The knights, 
as persons of the greatest property, formed the cavalry of the 
legions. But when their dignity increased, they refused to 
serve any longer in that capacity, and another kind of cavalry 
was obliged to be raised : thus Marius enlisted all sorts of peo- 
ple into his army, and soon after the republic was lost.^ 

Besides, the knights were the farmers of the revenue ; men 
whose great rapaciousness increased the public calamities. In- 
stead of giving to such as those the judicial power, they ought 
to have been constantly under the eye of the judges. This we 
must say in commendation of the ancient French laws, that 
they have acted towards the officers of the revenue with as 
great a diffidence as would be observed between enemies. 
When the judiciary power at Rome was transferred to the pub- 
licans, there was then an end of all virtue, polity, laws, and 
government. 

Of this we find a very ingenious description in some frag- 
ments of Diodorus Siculus and Dio. " Mutius Scsevola," says 

r The senatus-consultums were in 5 In the year 630. 

force for the space of a year, though not / " Capite censos plerosque." — Sallust, 

confirmed by the people.— Dionys. Hali- " de belle Jugurth. 
earn, book IX. p. 595, and book XI. p. 
735- 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 179 

Diodoriis,?' " wanted to revive the ancient manners, and the 
laudable custom of sober and frugal living. For his prede- 
cessors having entered into a contract with the farmers of the 
revenue, who at that time were possessed of the judiciary power 
at Rome, had infected the province with all manner of corrup- 
tion. But Scsevola made an example of the publicans, and im- 
prisoned those by whom others had been confined." 

Dio informs us a that Publius Rutilius, his lieutenant, was 
equally obnoxious to the equestrian order, and that upon his 
return they accused him of having received some presents, and 
condemned him to a fine ; upon which he instantly made a ces- 
sion of his goods. His innocence appeared in this, that he was 
found to be worth a great deal less than what he was charged 
with having extorted, and he showed a just title to what he 
possessed : but he would not live any longer in the same city 
with such profligate wretches. 

The Italians, says Diodorus again,&amp; bought up whole 
droves of slaves in Sicily, to till their lands and to take care of 
their cattle ; but refused them a necessary subsistence. These 
wretches were then forced to go and rob on the highways, 
armed with lances and clubs, covered with beasts' skins, and 
followed by large mastififs. Thus the whole province was laid 
waste, and the inhabitants could not call anything their own 
but what was secured by fortresses. There was neither pro- 
consul nor pretor that could or would oppose this disorder, or 
that presumed to punish these slaves, because they belonged 
to the knights, who, at Rome, were possessed of the judiciary 
power.c And yet this was one of the causes of the war of the 
slaves. But I shall add only one word more. A profession 
deaf and inexorable, that can have no other view than lucre, 
that was always asking and never granting, that impoverished 
the rich and increased even the misery of the poor — such a pro- 
fession, I say, should never have been intrusted with the ju- 
diciary power at Rome. 

u Fragment of this author, hook h FraRmcnt of the 34th book in the 

XXXVI., in the collection of Con- "Extract of Virtues and Vices." 

stantine T'orphyrogcnitus, of " X'^irtues r " Penes quos Romje tuni judicia 

and Vices." crant, atque ex equestri ordinc solerent 

a FraRment of his history, taken from sorlito judices elisi in causa Pr.-Ptorum 

the *' Extract of Virtues and Vices." ct I'roconsulum, quibus post adminis- 

tratam provinciani dies dicta crat." 



iSo MONTESQUIEU 

19. — Of the Government of the Roman Provinces 

Such was the distribution of the three powers in Rome. But 
they were far from being thus distributed in the provinces. 
Liberty prevailed in the centre and tyranny in the extreme 
parts. 

While Rome extended her dominions no farther than Italy, 
the people were governed as confederates, and the laws of each 
republic were preserved. But when she enlarged her con- 
quests, and the senate had no longer an immediate inspection 
over the provinces, nor the magistrates residing at Rome were 
any longer capable of governing the empire, they were obliged 
to send pretors and proconsuls. Then it was that the harmony 
of the three powers was lost. The persons appointed to that 
office were intrusted with a power which comprehended that 
of all the Roman magistracies ; nay, even that of the people.^? 
They were despotic magistrates, extremely well adapted to the 
distance of the places to which they were destined. They ex- 
ercised the three powers ; and were, if I may presume to use 
the expression, the bashaws of the republic. 

We have elsewhere observed that in a commonwealth the 
same magistrate ought to be possessed of the executive power, 
as well civil as military. Hence a conquering republic can 
hardly communicate her government, and rule the conquered 
state according to her own constitution. And, indeed, as the 
magistrate she sends to govern is invested with the executive 
power, both civil and military, he must also have the legisla- 
tive : for who is it that could make laws without him ? It is 
necessary, therefore, that the governor she sends be intrusted 
with the three powers, as was practised in the Roman provinces. 

It is more easy for a monarchy to communicate its govern- 
ment, because the officers it sends have, some the civil execu- 
tive, and others the military executive power, which does not 
necessarily imply a despotic authority. 

It was a privilege of the utmost consequence to a Roman 
citizen to have none but the people for his judge. Were it not 
for this, he would have been subject in the provinces to the 
arbitrary power of a proconsul or of a propretor. The city 

d They made their edicts upon entering the provinces. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS i8i 

never felt the tyranny which was exercised only on conquered 
nations. 

Thus, in the Roman world, as at Sparta, the freemen en- 
joyed the highest degree of liberty, while those who were slaves 
labored under the extremity of servitude. 

While the citizens paid taxes, they were raised with great 
justice and equality. The regulation of Servius Tullius was 
observed, who had distributed the people into six classes, ac- 
cording to their difference of property, and fixed the several 
shares of the public imposts in proportion to that which each 
person had in the government. Hence they bore with the 
greatness of the tax because of their proportionable greatness 
of credit, and consoled themselves for the smallness of their 
credit because of the smallness of the tax. 

There was also another thing worthy of admiration, which 
is, that as Servius Tullius's division into classes was in some 
measure the fundamental principle of the constitution, it thence 
followed that an equal levying of the taxes was so connected 
with this fundamental principle that the one could not be abol- 
ished without the other. 

But while the city paid the taxes as she pleased, or paid none 
at all/ the provinces were plundered by the knights, who were 
the farmers of the public revenue. We have already made 
mention of their oppressive extortions, with which all history 
abounds. 

" All Asia," says Mithridates,^ " expects me as her deliverer; 
so great is the hatred which the rapaciousness of the procon- 
suls,^ the confiscations made by the officers of the revenue, and 
the quirks and cavils of judicial proceedings,/^ have excited 
against the Romans." 

Hence it was that the strength of the provinces did not in- 
crease, but rather w^eakened, the strength of the republic. 
Hence it was that the provinces looked upon the loss of the 
liberty of Rome as the epoch of their own freedom. 

e After the conquest of Macedonia g See the orations apninst Verres. 

the Romans paid no taxes. h It is well known what sort of a tri&lt; 

f Speech taken from Trotrus Pom- bunal was that of Varus, which pro 

peius, and related by Justin, book voked the Germans to revolt. 
XXXVIII. 



i82 MONTESQUIEU 

20. — The End of this Book 

I should be glad to inquire into the distribution of the three 
powers, in all the moderate governments we are acquainted 
with, in order to calculate the degrees of liberty which each 
may enjoy. j3ut we must not always exhaust a subject, so as 
to leave no work at all for the reader. My business is not to 
make people read, but to make them think. 



BOOK XII 

OF THE LAWS THAT FORM POLITICAL LIB- 
ERTY, IN RELATION TO THE SUBJECT 

I. — Idea of this Book 

IT is not sufficient to have treated of political liberty in rela- 
tion to the constitution ; we must examine it likewise in 
the relation it bears to the subject. 

We have observed that in the former case it arises from a 
certain distribution of the three powers ; but in the latter, we 
must consider it in another light. It consists in security, or in 
the opinion people have of their security. 

The constitution may happen to be free, and the subject not. 
The subject may be free, and not the constitution. In those 
cases, the constitution will be free by right, and not in fact; 
the subject will be free in fact, and not by right. 

It is the disposition only of the laws, and even of the funda- 
mental laws, that constitutes liberty in relation to the consti- 
tution. But as it regards the subject: manners, customs, or 
received examples may give rise to it, and particular civil laws 
may encourage it, as we shall presently observe. 

Further, as in most states liberty is more checked or de- 
pressed than their constitution requires, it is proper to treat of 
the particular laws that in each constitution are apt to assist or 
check the principle of liberty which each state is capable of re- 
ceiving. 

2. — Of the Liberty of the Subject 

Philosophic liberty consists in the free exercise of the will ; 
or at least, if we must speak agreeably to all systems, in an 
opinion that we have the free exercise of our will. Political 
liberty consists in security, or, at least, in the opinion that we 
enjoy security. 

This security is never more dangerously attacked than in 

183 



i84 MONTESQUIEU 

public or private accusations. It is, therefore, on the goodness 
of criminal laws that the liberty of the subject principally de- 
pends. 

Criminal laws did not receive their full perfection all at once. 
Even in places where liberty has been most sought after, it has 
not been always found. Aristotle « informs us that at Cumse 
the parents of the accuser might be witnesses. So imperfect 
was the law under the kings of Rome, that Servius Tullius 
pronounced sentence against the children of Ancus Martius, 
who were charged with having assassinated the king, his father- 
in-law.&amp; Under the first kings of France, Clotarius made a 
law,c that nobody should be condemned without being heard ; 
which shows that a contrary custom had prevailed in some par- 
ticular case or among some barbarous people. It was Charon- 
das that first established penalties against false witnesses.t^ 
When the subject has no fence to secure his innocence, he has 
none for his liberty. 

The knowledge already acquired in some countries, or that 
may be hereafter attained in others, concerning the surest rules 
to be observed in criminal judgments, is more interesting to 
mankind than any other thing in the world. 

Liberty can be founded on the practice of this knowledge 
only ; and supposing a state to have the best laws imaginable 
in this respect, a person tried under that state, and condemned 
to be hanged the next day, would have much more liberty than 
a pasha enjoys in Turkey. 

3. — The same Subject continued 

Those laws which condemn a man to death on the deposi- 
tion of a single witness are fatal to liberty. In reason there 
should be two, because a witness who affirms, and the accused 
who denies, make an equal balance, and a third must decline 
the scale. 

The Greeks e and Romans f required one voice more to con- 
demn : but our French laws insist upon two. The Greeks pre- 

a"PoIit." book IT. He gave his laws at Thurium in the 

b Tarquinius Priscus. See Dionys. 84th Olympiad. 

Hahcarn. book TV. e See Aristid. Orat. " in Minervam." 

c As early as the year 560. f Dionys. Halicarn. on the Judgment 

d Anstot. " Polit," book II. chap. xii. of Coriolanus, book VII. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 185 

tend that their custom was estabUshed by the gods ;g but this 
more justly may be said of ours./f 

4. — That Liberty is favored by the Nature and Proportion of 

Punishments 

Liberty is in perfection when criminal laws derive each pun- 
ishment from the particular nature of the crime. There are 
then no arbitrary decisions ; the punishment does not flow 
from the capriciousness of the legislator, but from the very 
nature of the thing ; and man uses no violence to man. 

There are four sorts of crimes. Those of the first species are 
prefudicial to religion, the second to morals, the third to the 
public tranquillity, and the fourth to the security of the sub- 
ject. The punishments inflicted for these crimes ought to pro- 
ceed from the nature of each of these species. 

In the class of crimes that concern religion, I rank only those 
which attack it directly, such as all simple sacrileges. For as to 
crimes that disturb the exercise of it, they are of the nature of 
those which prejudice the tranquillity or security of the subject, 
and ought to be referred to those classes. 

In order to derive the punishment of simple sacrileges from 
the nature of the thing,? it should consist in depriving people 
of the advantages conferred by religion in expelling them out 
of the temples, in a temporary or perpetual exclusion from the 
society of the faithful, in shunning their presence, in execra- 
tions, comminations, and conjurations. 

In things that prejudice the tranquillity or security of the 
state, secret actions are subject to human jurisdiction. But 
in those which ofTend the Deity, where there is no public act, 
there can be no criminal matter, the whole passes between man 
and God, who knows the measure and time of His vengeance. 
Now if magistrates confounding things should inquire also 
into hidden sacrileges, this inquisition would be directed to a 
kind of action that does not at all require it : the liberty of the 
subject would be subverted by arming the zeal of timorous as 
well as of presumptuous consciences against him. 

g Mincrv:i; calculus. « St. Louis made such severe laws 

h Voltaire declares that it is England, against those who swore, that the Pope 

and not France, that is deserving of thought himself ohligcd to admonish 

this high praise; for it is in the former him for it. This prince moderated his 

that the juries must agree in order to zeal, and softened his laws. — See his 

condemn a man.— Ed. " Ordinances." 



1 86 MONTESQUIEU 

The mischief arises from a notion which some people have 
entertained of revenging the cause of the Deity. But we must 
honor the Deity and leave him to avenge his own cause. And, 
indeed, were we to be directed by such a notion, where would 
be the end of punishments ? If human laws are to avenge the 
cause of an infinite Being, they will be directed by his infinity, 
and not by the weakness, ignorance, and caprice of man. 

An historian / of Provence relates a fact which furnishes us 
with an excellent description of the consequences that may 
arise in weak capacities from the notion of avenging the Deity's 
cause. A Jew was accused of having blasphemed against the 
Virgin Mary ; and upon conviction was condemned to be flayed 
alive. A strange spectacle was then exhibited : gentlemen 
masked, with knives in their hands, mounted the scaffold, and 
drove away the executioner, in order to be the avengers them- 
selves of the honor of the blessed Virgin. I do not here choose 
to anticipate the reflections of the reader. 

The second class consists of those crimes which are preju- 
dicial to morals. Such is the violation of public or private con- 
tinence, that is, of the police directing the manner in which the 
pleasure annexed to the conjunction of the sexes is to be en- 
joyed. The punishment of those crimes ought to be also de- 
rived from the nature of the thing; the privation of such ad- 
vantages as society has attached to the purity of morals, fines, 
shame, necessity of concealment, public infamy, expulsion from 
home and society, and, in fine, all such punishments as belong 
to a corrective jurisdiction, are sufBcient to repress the temerity 
of the two sexes. In effect these things are less founded on 
malice than on carelessness and self-neglect. 

We speak here of none but crimes which relate merely to 
morals, for as to those that are also prejudicial to the public 
security, such as rapes, they belong to the fourth species. 

The crimes of the third class are those which disturb the 
public tranquillity. The punishments ought therefore to be 
derived from the nature of the thing, and to be in relation to 
this tranquillity ; such as imprisonment, exile, and other like 
chastisements, proper for reclaiming turbulent spirits, and 
obliging them to conform to the established order. 

I confine those crimes that injure the public tranquillity to 

/ Father Bougerel. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 187 

things which imply a bare offence against the poHce ; for as to 
those which by disturbing the public peace attack at the same 
time the security of the subject, they ought to be ranked in the 
fourth class. 

The punishments inflicted upon the latter crimes are such as 
are properly distinguished by that name. They are a kind 
of retaliation, by which the society refuses security to a mem- 
ber, who has actually or intentionally deprived another of his 
security. These punishments are derived from the nature of 
the thing, founded on reason, and drawn from the very source 
of good and evil. A man deserves death when he has violated 
th&amp; security of the subject so far as to deprive, or attempt to 
deprive, another man of his life. This punishment of death is 
the remedy, as it were, of a sick society. When there is a breach 
of security with regard to property, there may be some reasons 
for inflicting a capital punishment : but it would be much bet- 
ter, and perhaps more natural, that crimes committed against 
the security of property should be punished with the loss of 
property ; and this ought, indeed, to be the case if men's 
fortunes were common or equal. But as those who have no 
property of their own are generally the readiest to attack that 
of others, it has been found necessary, instead of a pecuniary, 
to substitute a corporal, punishment. 

All that I have here advanced is founded in nature, and ex- 
tremely favorable to the liberty of the subject. 

5. — Of certain Accusations that require particular Moderation 

and Prudence 

It is an important maxim, that we ought to be very circum- 
spect in the prosecution of witchcraft and heresy. The accu- 
sation of these two crimes may be vastly injurious to lil)erty, 
and productive of infinite oppression, if the legislator knows 
not how to set bounds to it. For as it does not directly point 
at a person's actions, but at his character, it grows dangerous 
in proportion to the ignorance of the people ; and then a man 
is sure to be always in danger, because the most exceptional 
conduct, the purest morals, and the constant practice of every 
duty in life are not a sufficient security against the suspicion of 
his being guilty of the like crimes. 



i88 MONTESQUIEU 

Under Manuel Comnenus, the Protestator k was accused of 
having conspired against the emperor, and of having employed 
for that purpose some secrets that render men invisible. It is 
mentioned in the life of this emperor / that Aaron was detected, 
as he was poring over a book of Solomon's, the reading of 
which was sufficient to conjure up whole legions of devils. Now 
by supposing a power in witchcraft to rouse the infernal spirits 
to arms, people look upon a man whom they call a sorcerer as 
the person in the world most likely to disturb and subvert 
society ; and, of course, they are disposed to punish him with 
the utmost severity. 

But their indignation increases when witchcraft is supposed 
to have the power of subverting religion. The history of Con- 
stantinople w informs us that in consequence of a revelation 
made to a bishop of a miracle having ceased because of the 
magic practices of a certain person, both that person and his 
son were put to death. On how many surprising things did 
not this single crime depend ? That revelations should not be 
uncommon, that the bishop should be favored with one, that it 
was real, that there had been a miracle in the case, that this 
miracle had ceased, that there was an art magic, that magic 
could subvert religion, that this particular person was a magi- 
cian, and, in fine, that he had committed that magic act. 

The Emperor Theodorus Lascarus attributed his illness to 
witchcraft. Those who were accused of this crime had no other 
resource left than to handle a red-hot iron without being hurt. 
Thus among the Greeks a person ought to have been a sorcerer 
to be able to clear himself of the imputation of witchcraft. Such 
was the excess of their stupidity that to the most dubious crime 
in the world they joined the most dubious proofs of innocence. 

Under the reign of Philip the Long, the Jews were expelled 
from France, being accused of having poisoned the springs 
with their lepers. So absurd an accusation ought to make us 
doubt all those that are founded on public hatred. 

T have not here asserted that heresy ought not to be pun- 
ished ; I said only that we ought to be extremely circumspect 
in punishing it. 

k Nicetas, " Life of Manuel Comne- m " Historv of the Emperor Maurice," 

nus," book IV. by Theophylactus, chap. n. 

/ Ibid. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 1S9 

6. — Of the Crime against Nature 

God forbid that I should have the least inclination to dimin- 
ish the public horror against a crime which religion, morality, 
and civil government equally condemn. It ought to be pro- 
scribed, were it only for its communicating to one sex the weak- 
nesses of the other, and for leading people by a scandalous pros- 
titution of their youth to an ignominious old age. What I 
shall say concerning it will in no way diminish its infamy, being 
levelled only against the tyranny that may abuse the very hor- 
ror we ought to have against the vice. 

As a natural circumstance of this crime is secrecy, there are 
frequent instances of its having been punished by legislators 
upon the deposition of a child. This was opening a very wide 
door to calumny. " Justinian," says Procopius,o " published a 
law against this crime ; he ordered an inquiry to be made 
not only against those who were guilty of it, after the enacting 
of that law, but even before. The deposition of a single wit- 
ness, sometimes of a child, sometimes of a slave, was sufficient, 
especially against such as were rich, and against those of the 
green faction." 

It is very odd that these three crimes, witchcraft, heresy, 
and that against nature, of which the first might easily be proved 
not to exist ; the second to be susceptible of an infinite number 
of distinctions, interpretations, and limitations ; the third to be 
often obscure and uncertain — it is very odd, I say, that these 
three crimes should amongst us be punished with fire. 

I may venture to affirm that the crime against nature will 
never make any great progress in society unless people are 
prompted to it by some particular custom, as among the 
Greeks, where the youths of that country performed all their 
exercises naked ; as amongst us, where domestic education is 
disused ; as amongst the Asiatics, where particular persons 
have a great number of women whom they despise, while others 
can have none at all. Let there be no customs preparatory to 
this crime ; let it, like every other violation of morals, be 
severely proscribed by the civil magistrate ; and nature will 
soon defend or resume her rights. Nature, that fond, that in- 
dulgent parent, has strewed her pleasures with a bounteous 

a " Secret History." 



I90 MONTESQUIEU 

hand, and while she fills us with delights she prepares us, by 
means of our issue, in whom we see ourselves, as it were, re- 
produced — she prepares us, I say, for future satisfactions of 
a more exquisite kind than those very delights. 

7. — Of the Crime of High Treason 

It is determined by the laws of China that whosoever shows 
any disrespect to the emperor is to be punished with death. 
As they do not mention in what this disrespect consists, every- 
thing may furnish a pretext to take away a man's life, and to 
exterminate any family whatsoever. 

Two persons of that country who were employed to write 
the Court gazette, having inserted some circumstances relating 
to a certain fact that was not true, it was pretended that to tell 
a lie in the Court gazette was a disrespect shown to the Court, 
in consequence of which they were put to death.&amp; A prince of 
the blood having inadvertently made some mark on a memorial 
signed with the red pencil by the emperor, it was determined 
that he had behaved disrespectfully to the sovereign; which 
occasioned one of the most terrible persecutions against that 
family that ever was recorded in history.^ 

If the crime of high treason be indeterminate, this alone is 
sufBcient to make the government degenerate into arbitrary 
power. I shall descant more largely on this subject when I 
come to treat&lt;^ of the composition of laws. 

8. — Of the Misapplication of the Terms Sacrilege and High 

Treason 

It is likewise a shocking abuse to give the appellation of 
high treason to an action that does not deserve it. By an im- 
perial law*? it was decreed that those who called in question the 
prince's judgment, or doubted the merit of such as he had 
chosen for a public of^ce, should be prosecuted as guilty of 
sacrilege./^ Surely it was the cabinet council and the prince's 
favorites who invented that crime. By another law, it was de- 

b Father Dit TTalde, torn. i. p. 43. f " Sacrilegii instar est dubitare an is 

c Father Parennin in the " Edifying dignus sit quern elegerit imperator." 
Letters." —Code " de Crimin. Sacril." This law 

rf Book XXTX. _ . - . . - 

e Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodo- 
sitis. This is the second in the Code 
" de Crimin. Sacril." 



has served as a model to that of Roger 
in the " Constitution of Naples," tit. 4. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 191 

termined that whosoever made any attempt to injure the min- 
isters and officers belonging to the sovereign should be deemed 
guilty of high treason, as if he had attempted to injure the sov- 
ereign himself.i: This law is owing to two princes'^ remark- 
able for their weakness — princes who were led by their minis- 
ters as flocks by shepherds ; princes who were slaves in the 
palace, children in the council, strangers to the army ; princes, 
in fine, who preserved their authority only by giving it away 
every day. Some of those favorites conspired against their 
sovereigns. Nay, they did more, they conspired against the 
empire — they called in barbarous nations ; and when the em- 
perors wanted to stop their progress the state was so enfeebled 
as to be under a necessity of infringing the law, and of exposing 
itself to the crime of high treason in order to punish those favor- 
ites. 

And yet this is the very law which the judge of Monsieur de 
Cinq-Mars built upon* when endeavoring to prove that the lat- 
ter was guilty of the crime of high treason for attempting to 
remove Cardinal Richelieu from the ministry. He says: 
" Crimes that aim at the persons of ministers are deemed by 
the imperial constitutions of equal consequence with those 
which are levelled against the emperor's own person. A minis- 
ter discharges his duty to his prince and to his country: to 
attempt, therefore, to remove him, is endeavoring to deprive 
the former one of his arms,/ and the latter of part of its power." 
It is impossible for the meanest tools of power to express them- 
selves in more servile language. 

By another law of Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius,^ 
false coiners are declared guilty of high treason. But is not this 
confounding the ideas of things? Is not the very horror of 
high treason diminished by giving that name to another crime? 



9. — The same Subject continued 

Paulinus having written to the Emperor Alexander, that 
'* he was preparing to prosecute for high treason a judge who 
had decided contrary to his edict," the emperor answered, " that 

pThe 5th law, "ad leR. Jul. Maj." sunt."— The same law of the Code "ad 

rt Arradiiis and TTnnoritis. lep. Jul. Maj." 

t " Memoirs of Montrcsor," torn. i. k Tt is the oth of the Code Theod. " de 

) " Nam ipsi pars corporis nostri falsa moneta." 



192 MONTESQUIEU 

under his reign there was no such thing as indirect high trea- 
son."/ 

Faustinian wrote to the same emperor, that as he had sworn 
by the prince's Hfe never to pardon his slave, he found himself 
thereby obliged to perpetuate his wrath, lest he should incur 
the guilt of Iccsa majcsfas. Upon which the emperor made 
answer, " Your fears are groundless,"^ and you are a stranger 
to my principles." 

It was determined by a senatus-consultuni « that whosoever 
melted down any of the emperor's statues which happened to 
be rejected should not be deemed guilty of high treason. The 
Emperors Severus and Antoninus wrote to Pontius,o that those 
who sold unconsecrated statues of the emperor should not be 
charged with high treason. The same princes wrote to Julius 
Cassianus, that if a person in flinging a stone should by chance 
strike one of the emperor's statues he should not be liable to 
a prosecution for high treason./' The Julian law requires this 
sort of limitations ; for in virtue of this law the crime of high 
treason was charged not only upon those who melted down the 
emperor's statues, but likewise on those who committed any 
such like action,^ which made it an arbitrary crime. When a 
number of crimes of Icrsa majesfas had been established, they 
were obliged to distinguish the several sorts. Hence Ulpian, 
the civilian, after saying that the accusation of Icusa majcstas 
did not die with the criminal, adds that this does not relate to 
all the treasonable acts established by the Julian law,fl but only 
to that which implies an attempt against the empire, or against 
the emperor's life. 

10. — The same Subject continued 

There was a law passed in England under Henry VHI, by 
which whoever predicted the king's death was declared guilty 
of high treason. This law was extremely vague; the terror 
of despotic power is so great that it recoils upon those who 

I " Etiam ex aliis causis majestatis o See the 5th law ibid. 

crimina cessant meo saeculo." — Leg. i p Ibid. . 

" eod ad leg. Jul. Maj." &lt;; " Aliudve quid simile admisermt. — 

m " Alicnam sectse meae solicitudinem Leg. 6 fif. " ad leg. Jiil. Maj." 

concepisti."— Leg. 2 " eod. ad leg. Jul. a In the last law in ff. "ad leg. Jul. de 

Maj." Adulteris. 

n See the 4th law in ff. " ad leg. Jul. 
Maj." 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



193 



exercise it. In the king's last illness, the physicians would not 
venture to say he was in danger ; and surely they acted very 
right.^ 

II. — Of Thoughts 

Marsyas dreamed that he had cut Dionysius's throat.c 
Dionysius put him to death, pretending that he would never 
have dreamed of such a thing by night if he had not thought of 
it by day. This was a most tyrannical action : for though it 
had been the subject of his thoughts, yet he had made no at- 
tempt^ towards it. The laws do not take upon them to punish 
any other than overt acts. 

12. — Of indiscreet Speeches 

Nothing renders the crime of high treason more arbitrary 
than declaring people gnilty of it for indiscreet speeches. 
Speech is so subject to interpretation ; there is so great a dif- 
ference between indiscretion and malice ; and frequently so 
little is there of the latter in the freedom of expression, that the 
law can hardly subject people to a capital punishment for words 
unless it expressly declares what words they are.^ 

Words do not constitute an overt act ; they remain only 
in idea. When considered by themselves, they have generally 
no determinate signification ; for this depends on the tone in 
which they are uttered. It often happens that in repeating the 
same words they have not the same meaning ; this depends on 
their connection with other things, and sometimes more is 
signified by silence than by any expression whatever. Since 
there can be nothing so equivocal and ambiguous as all this, 
how is it possible to convert it into a crime of high treason ? 
Wherever this law is established, there is an end not only of 
liberty, but even of its very shadow. 

In the manifesto of the late Czarina against the family of the 
D'Olgoruckys,/^ one of those princes is condemned to death for 
having uttered some indecent words concerning her person : 
another, for having maliciously interpreted her imperial laws, 

h See Burnet's " History of the Refor- vel scriptura legis descendit vel ad ex- 

mation." emphim legis vindicandum est," says 

c Plutarch's " Life of Dionysius." Modcstinus in the seventh law, in flf. 

d The thought must be joined with " ad leg. Jul. Maj." 

some sort of action. / In 1740. 

e " Si non tale sit delictum in quod 

Vol. I.— 13 



194 MONTESQUIEU 

and for having offended her sacred person by disrespectful ex- 
pressions. 

Not that I pretend to diminish the just indignation of the 
public against those who presume to stain the glory of their 
sovereign ; what I mean is, that if despotic princes are willing 
to moderate their power, a milder chastisement would be more 
proper on those occasions than the charge of high treason — ■ 
a thing always terrible even to innocence itself.g 

Overt acts do not happen every day ; they are exposed to 
the eye of the public ; and a false charge with regard to matters 
of fact may be easily detected. Words carried into action as- 
sume the nature of that action. Thus a man who goes into a 
public market-place to incite the subject to revolt incurs the 
guilt of high treason, because the words are joined to the action, 
and partake of its nature. It is not the words that are pun- 
ished, but an action in which words are employed. They do 
not become criminal, but when they are annexed to a criminal 
action : everything is confounded if words are construed into 
a capital crime, instead of considering them only as a mark of 
that crime. 

The Emperors Theodosius, Arcadius, and Honorius wrote 
thus to Rufinus, who was prcefectus prcetorio: " Though a 
man should happen to speak amiss of our person or govern- 
ment, we do not intend to punish him :h if he has spoken 
through levity, we must despise him ; if through folly, we must 
pity him ; and if he wrongs us, we must forgive him. There- 
fore, leaving things as they are, you are to inform us accord- 
ingly, that we may be able to judge of words by persons, and 
that we may duly consider whether we ought to punish or over- 
look them." 

13. — Of Writings 

In writings there is something more permanent than in 
words, but when they are in no way preparative to high treason 
they cannot amount to that charge. 

And yet Augustus and Tiberius subjected satirical writers to 
the same punishment as for having violated the law of majesty. 

g " Nee luhricum lingua; ad poenam h " Si id ex levitate processerit, con- 

facile trahendum est."— Modestin. in temnendum est; si ex insania. misera- 
the seventh law in ff. "ad leg. Jul. tione dignissimum; si ab injuria, re- 
Maj." mittendum." — Leg. unica Cod. "Si quis 

Imperat. maled." 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



195 



Augustus,! because of some libels that had been written against 
persons of the first quality ; Tiberius, because of those which 
he suspected to have been written against himself. Nothing 
was more fatal to Roman liberty. Cremutius Cordus was ac- 
cused of having called Cassius in his annals the last of the 
Romans.; 

Satirical writings are hardly known in despotic governments, 
where dejection of mind on the one hand, and ignorance on the 
other, afford neither abilities nor will to write. In democracies 
they are not hindered, for the very same reason which causes 
them to be prohibited in monarchies ; being generally levelled 
against men of power and authority, they flatter the malig- 
nancy of the people, who are the governing party. In mon- 
archies they are forbidden, but rather as a subject of civil 
animadversion than as a capital crime. They may amuse the 
general malevolence, please the malcontents, diminish the envy 
against public employments, give the people patience to suffer, 
and make them laugh at their sufferings. 

But no government is so averse to satirical writings as the 
aristocratic. There the magistrates are petty sovereigns, but 
not great enough to despise affronts. If in a monarchy a 
satirical stroke is designed against the prince, he is placed on 
such an eminence that it does not reach him ; but an aristocratic 
lord is pierced to the very heart. Hence the decemvirs, who 
formed an aristocracy, punished satirical writings with death.^ 

14. — Breach of Modesty in pHiiishing Crimes 

There are rules of modesty observed by almost every nation 
in the world ; now it would be very absurd to infringe these 
rules in the punishment of crimes, the principal view of which 
ought always to be the establishment of order. 

Was it the intent of those Oriental nations who exposed 
women to elephants trained up for an abominable kind of pun- 
ishment — was it, I say, their intent to establish one law by the 
breach of another? 

By an ancient custom of the Romans it was not permitted to 
put girls to death till they were ripe for marriage. Tiberius 

i Tacit. " Annal." book T. Tliis con- ; Tacit. " .'\nnal." book IV. 

tinued under the followinp; reigns. See k The law of the Twelve Tables, 

the first law in the Code " de famosis 
libellis." 



X96 



MONTESQUIEU 



found an expedient of having them debauched by the exe- 
cutioner before they were brought to the place of punishment :/ 
that bloody and subtle tyrant destroyed the morals of the peo- 
ple to preserve their customs. 

When the magistrates of Japan caused women to be exposed 
naked in the market-places, and obliged them to go upon all 
fours like beasts, modesty was shocked -jn but when they wanted 
to compel a mother — when they wanted to force a son — I can- 
not proceed ; even Nature herself is struck with horror. 

15. — Of the Enfranchisement of Slaves in order to accuse 

their Master 

Augustus made a law that the slaves of those who conspired 
against his person should be sold to the public, that they might 
depose against their master.?^ Nothing ought to be neglected 
which may contribute to the discovery of a heinous crime ; it 
is natural, therefore, that in a government where there are 
slaves they should be allowed to inform ; but they ought not 
to be admitted as witnesses. 

Vindex discovered the conspiracy that had been formed in 
favor of Tarquin ; but he was not admitted a witness against 
the children of Brutus. It was right to give liberty to a person 
who had rendered so great a service to his country ; but it was 
not given him with a view of enabling him to render this ser- 
vice. 

Hence the Emperor Tacitus ordained that slaves should not 
be admitted as witnesses against their masters, even in the case 
of high treason :o a law which was not inserted in Justinian's 
compilation. 

16. — Of Calumny with regard to the Crime of High Treason 
To do justice to the Caesars, they were not the first devisers 
of the horrid laws which they enacted. It was Sylla/" that taught 
them that calumniators ought not to be punished; but the 
abuse was soon carried to such excess as to reward them.? 



/ Suetonius, in " Tiberio." 

m " Collection of Voyages that Con- 
tributed to the Establishment of the 
East India Company," torn. v. part II. 

n Dio, in " Xiphilinus." Tacitus at- 
tributes this law, not to Augustus, but 
to Tiberius. — P. 

Flavius Vopiscus in his life. 

p Sylla made a law of majesty, which 
is mentioned in Cicero's Orations, " pro 



Cluentio," art. 3, " in Pisonem," art. 21, 
2d against " Verres," art. 5. " Familiar 
Epistles," book III. letter 11. Caesar 
and Augustus inserted them in the 
Julian laws; others made additions to 
them. 

q " Et quo quis distinctior accusator, 
eo magis honores assequebatur, ac ve- 
luti sacrosanctus erat." — Tacit. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 197 

17. — Of the revealing of Conspiracies 

" If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy 
daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as 
thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, ' Let us go and 
serve other gods,' thou shalt surely kill him, thou shalt stone 
him." r This law of Deuteronomy cannot be a civil law among 
most of the nations known to us, because it would pave the way 
for all manner of wickedness. 

No less severe is the law of several countries which com- 
mands the subjects, on pain of death, to disclose conspiracies in 
wliich they are not even so much as concerned. When such a 
law is established in a monarchical government, it is very 
proper it should be under some restrictions. 

It ought not to be applied in its full severity save to the 
strongest cases of high treason. In those countries it is of the 
utmost importance not to confound the different degrees of 
this crime. In Japan, where the laws subvert every idea of 
human reason, the crime of concealment is applied even to the 
most ordinary cases. 

A certain relatiom makes mention of two young ladies who 
were shut up for life in a box thick set with pointed nails, one 
for having had a love intrigue, and the other for not disclos- 
ing it. 

18. — Hozv dangerous it is in Republics to he too severe in 
punishing the Crime of High Treason 

As soon as a republic has compassed the destruction of those 
who wanted to subvert it, there should be an end of terrors, 
punishments, and even of rewards. 

Great punishments, and consequently great changes, can- 
not take place without investing some citizens with an exorbi- 
tant power. It is, therefore, more advisable in this case to ex- 
ceed in lenity than in severity ; to banish but few, rather than 
many ; and to leave them their estates, instead of making a 
vast number of confiscations. Under pretence of avenging the 
republic's cause, the avengers would establish tyranny. The 

r Dciit. xiii. 6. East India Company," p. 423, book V. 

5 " Collection of Voyages that Con- part II. 
tributed to the Establishment of the 



198 MONTESQUIEU 

business is not to destroy the rebel, but the rebelhon. They 
ought to return as quickly as possible into the usual track of 
government, in which every one is protected by the laws, and 
no one injured. 

The Greeks set no bounds to the vengeance they took upon 
tyrants, or of those they suspected of tyranny ; they put their 
children to death,^ nay, sometimes five of their nearest rela- 
tives ;o and they proscribed an infinite number of families. By 
such means their republics suffered the most violent shocks: 
exiles, or the return of the exiled, were always epochs that 
indicated a change of the constitution. 

The Romans had more sense. When Cassius was put to 
death for having aimed at tyranny, the question was proposed 
whether his children should undergo the same fate : but they 
were preserved. " They," says Dionysius Halicarnassus,&amp; 
" who wanted to change this law at the end of the Marsian and 
civil wars, and to exclude from public offices the children of 
those who had been proscribed by Sylla, are very much to 
blame." 

We find in the wars of Marius and Sylla to what excess the 
Romans had gradually carried their barbarity. Such scenes of 
cruelty it was hoped would never be revived. But under the 
triumvirs, they committed greater acts of oppression, though 
with some appearance of lenity ; and it is provoking to see 
what sophisms they make use of to cover their inhumanity. 
Appian has given use the formula of the proscriptions. One 
would imagine they had no other aim than the good of the 
republic, with such calmness do they express themselves ; such 
advantages do they point out to the state ; such expediency 
do they show in the means they adopt ; such security do they 
promise to the opulent ; such tranquillity to the poor ; so ap- 
prehensive do they seem of endangering the lives of the citi- 
zens ; so desirous of appeasing the soldiers ; such felicity, in 
fine, do they presage to the commonwealth. c^ 

Rome was drenched in blood when Lepidus triumphed over 
Spain: yet, by an unparalleled absurdity, he ordered public 
rejoicing in that city, upon pain of proscription.^ 

t Dionys. Halicarn., " Roman An- b Book VIII. p. 547. 

tiquities," book VIII. c Of the civil wars, book IV. 

a " Tyranno occiso quinque ejus prox- d" Quod felix faustumque sit." 

imos copnatione magistratus necato." — e " Sacris et epulis dent hunc diem; 

Cic. " de invent." lib. II. qui secus faxit, inter proscriptos esto." 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



199 



19. — In what Manner the Use of Liberty is suspended in a 

Republic 

In countries where liberty is most esteemed, there are laws 
by which a single person is deprived of it, in order to preserve 
it for the whole community. Such are in England what they 
call Bills of Attainder/ These are in relation to those Athen- 
ian laws by which a private person was condemned,^' provided 
they were made by the unanimous suffrage of six thousand 
citizens. They are in relation also to those laws which were 
made at Rome against private citizens, and were called privil- 
eges.^ These were never passed except in the great meetings 
of the people. But in what manner soever they were enacted, 
Cicero was for having them abolished, because the force of a 
law consists in its being made for the whole community .i I 
must own, notwithstanding, that the practice of the freest na- 
tion that ever existed induces me to think that there are cases 
in which a veil should be drawn for a while over liberty, as it 
was customary to cover the statues of the gods. 



20. — Of Laws favorable to the Liberty of the Subject in a 

Republic 

In popular governments it often happens that accusations 
are carried on in public, and every man is allowed to accuse 
whomsoever he pleases. This rendered it necessary to estab- 
lish proper laws, in order to protect the innocence of the sub- 
ject. At Athens, if an accuser had not the fifth part of the 
votes on his side, he was obliged to pay a fine of a thousand 
drachms, v^schines, who accused Ctesiphon, was condemned 
to pay this fine./ At Rome, a false accuser was branded with 



f It is not sufficient in the courts of 
justice of that kingdom that the evi- 
dence be of such a nature as to satisfy 
the judges; there must be a legal 
proof^; and the law requires the depo- 
sition of two witnesses against the ac- 
cused. No other proof will do. Now, 
if a person who is presumed guilty of 
high treason should contrive to secrete 
the witnesses, so as to render it impos- 
sible for him to be legally condemned, 
the government then may bring a bill 
of attainder against him; that is, they 
may enact a particular law for that 
single fact. They proceed then in the 
same manner as in nil other bills 
brought into parliament; it must pass 



the two houses, and have the King's 
consent, otherwise it is not a bill: that 
is, a sentence of the Legislature. The 
person accused may plead against the 
bill by counsel, and the members of the 
house may speak in defence of the bill. 

g " Legem de singulari aliquo ne ro- 
gato, nisi sex millibus ita visum." — 
' Ex Andocide de Mysteriis." This is 
what they called Ostracism. 

It " ne privis hominihus latae." — Ci- 
cero, "de Leg." lib. III. 

I " Scitum est jussum in omnes."— 
Ibid. 

; .See Philostratus, book T. : " Live« 
of the Sophists," " Life of /Eschines." 
See likewise Plutarch and Phocius. 



200 MONTESQUIEU 

infamy k by marking the letter K / on his forehead. Guards 
were also appointed to watch the accuser, in order to prevent 
his corrupting either the judges or the witnesses.m 

I have already taken notice of that Athenian and Roman 
law by which the party accused was allowed to withdraw be- 
fore judgment was pronounced. 

21. — Of the Cruelty of Laivs in respect to Debtors in a 

Republic 

Great is the superiority which one fellow-subject has already 
over another, by lending him money, which the latter borrows 
in order to spend, and, of course, has no longer in his posses- 
sion. What must be the consequence if the laws of a republic 
make a further addition to this servitude and subjection? 

At Athens and Rome" it was at first permitted to sell such 
debtors as were insolvent. Solon redressed this abuse at 
Athenso by ordaining that no man's body should answer for 
his civil debts. But the decemvirs/' did not reform the same 
custom at Rome; and though they had Solon's regulation 
before their eyes yet they did not choose to follow it. This is 
not the only passage of the law of the Twelve Tables in which 
the decemvirs show their design of checking the spirit of democ- 
racy. 

Often did those cruel laws against debtors throw the Roman 
republic into danger. A man covered with wounds made his 
escape from his creditor's house and appeared in the forum.g 
The people were moved with this spectacle, and other citizens 
whom their creditors durst no longer confine broke loose from 
their dungeons. They had promises made them, which were 
all broken. The people upon this, having withdrawn to the 
Sacred Mount, obtained, not an abrogation of those laws, but 
a magistrate to defend them. Thus they quitted a state of 
anarchy, but were soon in danger of falling into tyranny. 
Manlius, to render himself popular, was going to set those citi- 

^ By the Remmian law. o Plutarch, " Life of Solon." 

I i his was the initial of an old Latin pit appears from history that this 

nia "-"p ^^ ^^ '^ written " Calum- custom was established among the 

Tj, V I- ■ . Romans before the law of the Twelve 

^mllutarch, in a treatise entitled, Tables.— Livy, dec. i, book TI. 

HOW a person may reap advantage &lt;? Dionys. Halicarn., "Roman An- 

from his enemies." tiquities," book VL 

n A great many sold their children 
*f? ,Pay„tneir debts."— riutarch, " Life of 
Solon. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



20I 



zens at liberty who by their inhuman creditors'" had been re- 
duced to slavery. Manlius's designs were prevented, but with- 
out remedying the evil. Particular laws facilitated to debtors 
the means of paying ■/ and in the year of Rome 428 the consuls 
proposed a law,^ which deprived creditors of the power of con- 
fining their debtors in their own houses." A usurer, by name 
Papirius, attempted to corrupt the chastity of a young man 
named Publius, whom he kept in irons. Sextus's crime gave 
to Rome its political liberty ; that of Papirius gave it also the 
civil. 

Such was the fate of this city, that new crimes confirmed 
theJiberty which those of a more ancient date had procured it. 
Appius's attempt upon Virginia flung the people again into 
that horror against tyrants with which the misfortune of Lu- 
cretia had first inspired them. Thirty-seven years after^ the 
crime of the infamous Papirius, an action of the like criminal 
natures was the cause of the people's retiring to the Janicu- 
lum,o and of giving new vigor to the law made for the safety of 
debtors. 

Since that time creditors were oftener prosecuted by debtors 
for having violated the laws against usury than the latter were 
sued for refusing to pay them. 

22. — Of Things that strike at Liberty in Monarchies 

Liberty often has been weakened in monarchies by a thing 
of the least use in the world to the prince : this is the naming 
of commissioners to try a private person. 

The prince himself derives so very little advantage from 
those commissioners that it is not worth while to change for 
their sake the common course of things. He is morally sure 
that he has more of the spirit of probity and justice than his 
commissioners, who think themselves sufficiently justified by 
his nomination and orders, by a vague interest of state, and even 
by their very apprehensions. 



r Plutarch, " Life of Furius Camil- 
lus." 

s See what follows in the 24th chapter 
of the book of Laws as relative to the 
use of money. 

t One hundred and twenty years after 
the law of the Twelve Tables: " Eo 
anno plebi Romanrc, velut aliud initinm 
libertatis factum est, quod necti desic- 
runt."— Livy, lib. VIII. 

u " I?ona debitoris, non corpus ob- 
noxium essct."— Ibid. 



V The year of Rome 465. 

w That of Plautius, who made an at- 
tempt upon the body of Vcturius. — 
Valerius Maximus, book VI. art. g. 
These two events ought not to be con- 
founded; they are neither the same per- 
sons nor the same times. 

e Sec a fragment of Dionys. Halicarn. 
in tlie " Extract of Virtues and Vices "; 
Livy's epitome, book II.; and Frein- 
shemius, book II. 



202 MONTESQUIEU 

Upon the arraigning of a peer under Henry VIII it was cus- 
tomary to try him by a committee of the House of Lords : by 
which means he put to death as many peers as he pleased. 

2;^. — Of Spies in Monarchies 

Should I be asked whether there is any necessity for spies 
in monarchies my answer would be, that the usual practice of 
good princes is not to employ them. When a man obeys the 
laws, he has discharged his duty to his prince. He ought at 
least to have his own house for an asylum, and the rest of his 
conduct should be exempt from inquiry. The trade of a spy 
might perhaps be tolerable, were it practised by honest men ; 
but the necessary infamy of the person is sufficient to make us 
judge of the infamy of the thing. A prince ought to act towards 
his subjects with candor, frankness, and confidence. He that 
has so much disquiet, suspicion, and fear is an actor embar- 
rassed in playing his part. When he finds that the laws are 
generally observed and respected, he may judge himself safe. 
The behavior of the public answers for that of every individual. 
Let him not be afraid : he cannot imagine how natural it is for 
his people to love him. And how should they do otherwise 
than love him, since he is the source of almost all bounties 
and favors ; punishments being generally charged to the ac- 
count of the laws? He never shows himself to his people but 
with a serene countenance ; they have even a share of his glory, 
and they are protected by his power. A proof of his being be- 
loved is that his subjects have confidence in him : what the 
minister refuses, they imagine the prince would have granted. 
Even under public calamities they do not accuse his person ; 
they are apt to complain of his being misinformed, or beset by 
corrupt men. " Did the prince but know," say the people ; 
these words are a kind of invocation, and a proof of the confi- 
dence they have in his person. 

24. — Of Anonymous Letters 

The Tartars are obliged to put their names to their arrows, 
that the arm may be known which shoots them. When Philip 
of Macedon was wounded at the siege of a certain town, these 
words were found on the javelin, " Aster has given this mortal 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



203 



wound to Philip."&amp; If they who accuse a person did it merely 
to serve the pubHc, they would not carry their complaint to 
the prince, who may be easily prejudiced, but to the magis- 
trates, who have rules that are formidable only to calumniators. 
But if they are unwilling to leave the laws open between them 
and the accused, it is a presumption they have reason to be 
afraid of them ; and the least punishment they ought to suffer 
is not to be credited. No notice, therefore, should ever be 
taken of those letters, except in cases that admit not of the de- 
lays of the ordinary course of justice, and in which the prince's 
welfare is concerned. Then it may be imagined that the ac- 
cuser has made an effort, which has untied his tongue. But 
in other cases one ought to say, with the Emperor Constan- 
tius : " We cannot suspect a person who has wanted an ac- 
cuser, whilst he did not want an enemy. "c 

25. — Of the Manner of governing in Monarchies 

The royal authority is a spring that ought to move with the 
greatest freedom and ease. The Chinese boast of one of their 
emperors, who governed, they say, like the heavens, that is, 
by his example. 

There are some cases in which a sovereign ought to exert 
the full extent of his power ; and others in which he should 
reduce it within narrower limits. The sublimity of adminis- 
tration consists in knowing the proper degree of power, which 
should be exerted on different occasions. 

The whole felicity of monarchies consists in the opinion 
which the subjects entertain of the lenity of the government. 
A weak minister is ever ready to remind us of our slavery. 
But granting, even, that we are slaves, he should endeavor to 
conceal our misery from us. All he can say or write is that 
the prince is uneasy, that he is surprised, and that he will redress 
all grievances. There is a certain ease in commanding; the 
prince ought only to encourage, and let the laws menace.^ 

fc Plutarch's "Morals: Comparison of rf " Nerva," says Tacitus, "increased 

some Roman and Greek Histories," the ease of government." It is worthy 

torn. ii. p. 487. . . of note that the best editions of Tacitus 

c Leg. 6, Cod. Thcod. " de famosis li- have " feliritatem imperii," and not 

bellis. " facilitatem imperii."— Ed. 



204 MONTESQUIEU 

26. — That in a Monarchy the Prince ought to he of easy 

Access 

The utility of this maxim will appear from the inconvenience 
attending the contrary practice. " The Czar Peter I," says the 
Sieur Perry ,^ " has published a new edict, by which he forbids 
any of his subjects to offer him a petition till after having pre- 
sented it to two of his officers. In case of refusal of justice they 
may present him a third, but upon pain of death if they are in 
the wrong. After this no one ever presumed to offer a peti- 
tion to the Czar." 

27. — Of the Manners of a Monarch 

The manners of a prince contribute as much as the laws 
themselves to liberty; like these he may transform men into 
brutes, and brutes into men. If he prefers free and generous 
spirits, he will have subjects ; if he likes base, dastardly souls, 
he will have slaves. Would he know the great art of ruling, 
let him call honor and virtue to attend his person ; and let him 
encourage personal merit. He may even sometimes cast an 
eye on talents and abilities. Let him not be afraid of those 
rivals who are called men of merit ; he is their equal when once 
he loves them. Let him gain the hearts of his people, without 
subduing their spirits. Let him render himself popular; he 
ought to be pleased with the affections of the lowest of his sub- 
jects, for they too are men. The common people require so 
very little condescension, that it is fit they should be humored ; 
the infinite distance between the sovereign and them will surely 
prevent them from giving him any uneasiness. Let him be ex- 
orable to supplication, and resolute against demands ; let him 
be sensible, in fine, that his people have his refusals, while liis 
courtiers enjoy his favors. 

28. — Of the Regard zvhich Monarchs ozve to their Subjects 

Princes ought to be extremely circumspect with regard to 
raillery. It pleases with moderation, because it is an introduc- 
tion to familiarity ; but a satirical raillery is less excusable in 
them than in the meanest of their subjects, for it is they alone 
that give a mortal wound. 

«" State of Russia," p. 173, Paris edition, 1717. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 205 

Much less should they offer a pubHc affront to any of their 
subjects ; kings were instituted to pardon and to punish, but 
never to insult. 

When they affront their subjects, their treatment is more 
cruel than that of the Turk or the Muscovite. The insults of 
these are a humiliation, not a disgrace ; but both must follow 
from the insolent behavior of monarchs. 

Such is the prejudice of the eastern nations, that they look 
upon an affront from the prince as the effect of paternal good- 
ness ; and such, on the contrary, is our way of thinking, that 
besides the cruel vexation of being affronted, we despair of ever 
being able to wipe off the disgrace. 

Princes ought to be overjoyed to have subjects to whom 
honor is dearer than life, an incitement to fidelity as well as to 
courage. 

They should remember the misfortunes that have happened 
to sovereigns for insulting their subjects : the revenge of 
Chgerea, of the eunuch Narses, of Count Julian, and, in line, 
of the Duchess of Montpensier, who, being enraged against 
Henry III for having published some of her private failings, 
tormented him during her whole life. 

29. — Of the civil Lazvs proper for mixing some portion of 
Liberty in a despotic Government 

Though despotic governments are of their own nature every- 
where the same, yet from circumstances — from a religious 
opinion, from prejudice, from received examples, from a par- 
ticular turn of mind, from manners or morals — it is possible 
they may admit of a considerable difference. 

It is useful that some particular notions should be established 
in those governments. Thus in China the prince is considered 
as the father of his people ; and at the commencement of the 
empire of the Arabs, the prince was their preacher./^ 

It is proper there should be some sacred book to serve for a 
rule, as the Koran among the Arabs, the books of Zoroaster 
among the Persians, the Veda among the Indians, and the clas- 
sic books among the Chinese. The religious code supplies the 
civil and fixes the extent of arbitrary sway. 

It is not at all amiss that in dubious cases the judges should 
consult the ministers of religion.^ Thus, in Turkey, the Cadis 

/ The Caliphs. g " History of the Tartars," 3d part, p. 277, in the remarks. 



206 



MONTESQUIEU 



consult the Mollahs./» But if it is a capital crime, it may be 
proper for the particular judge, if such there be, to take the gov- 
ernor's advice, to the end that the civil and ecclesiastical power 
may be tempered also by the political authority. 

30. — The same Subject continued 

Nothing but the very excess and rage of despotic power 
ordained that the father's disgrace should drag after it that of 
his wife and children. They are wretched enough already 
without being criminals : besides, the prince ought to leave 
suppliants or mediators between himself and the accused, to 
assuage his wrath or to inform his justice. 

It is an excellent custom of the Maldivians,i that when a lord 
is disgraced he goes every day to pay his court to the king till 
he is taken again into favor : his presence disarms the prince's 
indignation. 

In some despotic governments; they have a notion that it 
is trespassing against the respect due to their prince to speak 
to him in favor of a person in disgrace. These princes seem 
to use all their endeavors to deprive themselves of the virtue 
of clemency. 

Arcadius and Honorius, by a law^ on which we have already 
descanted,/ positively declare that they will show no favor to 
those who shall presume to petition them in behalf of the guil- 
ty.m This was a very bad law indeed, since it is bad even under 
a despotic government. 

The custom of Persia, which permits every man that pleases 
to leave the kingdom, is excellent ; and though the contrary 
practice derives its origin from despotic power, which has ever 
considered the subjects as slaves,^ and those who quit the coun- 
try as fugitives, yet the Persian practice is useful even to a des- 
potic government, because the apprehension of people's with- 
drawing for debt restrains or moderates the oppressions ot 
pashas and extortioners. 



h It IS plain here that Montesquieu 
confounds the Mollahs with the Mufti. 
—P. 

I See Francis Pirard. 

y As at present in Persia, according to 
Sir John Chardin, this custom is very 
ancient. " They put Cavades," says 
Procopius, " into the castle of oblivion; 
there is a law which forbids any one to 
speak of those who are shut up, or even 
to mention their name." 

k The fifth law in the cod. " ad leg. 
Jul. Maj." 



/ In the 8th chapter of this book. 

m Frederick copied this law in the 
" Constitutions of Naples," book I. 

n In monarchies there is generally a 
law which forbids those who are in- 
vested with public employments to go 
out of the kingdom without the prince's 
leave. This law ought to be established 
also in republics. But in those that 
have particular institutions the prohibi- 
tion ought to be general, in order to 
prevent the introduction of foreign 
manners. 



CHOICE EXAMPLES OF CLASSIC SCULPTURE. 



AUGUSTUS. 

Photo-engraving from the original marble statue in the Vatican at Rome. 

Among the statues of Augustus, the best is that found in the year 1863, in the 
villa of Livia, about nine miles from Rome, at Porta Prima, and now in the Vatican 
collection. It represents the Emperor in richly decorated armor. Its origin has 
been fixed at about 17 B.C., and it is one of the most excellent portrait statues of 
the Roman epoch. Lubke, the art historian, says that it is unsurpassed for the 
nobleness of its conception and the delicacy of its artistic execution, besides being 
in an excellent state of preservation. 



BOOK XIII 

OF THE RELATION WHICH THE LEVYING OF 
TAXES AND THE GREATNESS OF THE PUBLIC 
REVENUES BEAR TO LIBERTY 

I. — Of the Public Revenues 

THE public revenues are a portion that each subject 
gives of his property, in order to secure or enjoy the 
remainder. 

To fix these revenues in a proper manner, regard should be 
had both to the necessities of the state and to those of the sub- 
ject. The real wants of the people ought never to give way to 
the imaginary wants of the state. 

Imaginary wants are those which flow from the passions and 
the weakness of the governors, from the vain conceit of some 
extraordinary project, from the inordinate desire of glory, and 
from a certain impotence of mind incapable of withstanding 
the impulse of fancy. Often have ministers of a restless disposi- 
tion imagined that the wants of their own mean and ignoble 
souls were those of the state. 

Nothing requires more wisdom and prudence than the regu- 
lation of that portion of which the subject is deprived, and that 
which he is suffered to retain. 

The public revenues should not be measured by the people's 
abilities to give, but by what they ought to give ; and if they 
are measured by their abilities to give, it should be considered 
what they are able to give for a constancy. 

2. — That it is had Reasoning to say that the Greatness of 
Taxes is good in its own Nature 

There have been instances in particular monarchies of petty 
states exempt from taxes that have been as miserable as the 
circumjacent places which groaned under the weight of exac- 

207 



2o8 MONTESQUIEU 

tioiis. The chief reason of this is, that the petty state can hardly 
have any such thing as industry, arts, or manufactures, because 
of its being subject to a thousand restraints from the great state 
by which it is environed. The great state is blessed with in- 
dustry, manufactures, and arts, and establishes laws by which 
those several advantages are procured. The petty state be- 
comes, therefore, necessarily poor, let it pay never so few taxes. 

And yet some have concluded from the poverty of those petty 
states that in order to render the people industrious they should 
be loaded with taxes. But it would be a juster inference, that 
they ought to pay no taxes at all. None live here but wretches 
who retire from the neighboring parts to avoid working — 
wretches who, disheartened by labor, make their whole felicity 
consist in idleness. 

The effect of wealth in a country is to inspire every heart with 
ambition : that of poverty is to give birth to despair. The 
former is excited by labor the latter is soothed by indolence. 

Nature is just to all mankind, and repays them for their in- 
dustry: she renders them industrious by annexing rewards 
in proportion to their labor. But if an arbitrary prince should 
attempt to deprive the people of nature's bounty, they would 
fall into a disrelish of industry ; and then indolence and inac- 
tion must be their only happiness. 

3. — Of Taxes in Countries where Part of the People are 

Villains or Bondmen 

The state of villanage is sometimes established after a con- 
quest. In that case, the bondman or villain that tills the land 
ought to have a kind of partnership with his master. Nothing 
but a communication of loss or profit can reconcile those who 
are doomed to labor to such as are blessed with a state of 
affluence. 

4. — Of a Republic in the like Case 

When a republic has reduced a nation to the drudgery of 
cultivating her lands, she ought never to suffer the free sub- 
ject to have the power of increasing the tribute of the bond- 
man. This was not permitted at Sparta. Those brave people 
thought the Helotes a would be more industrious in cultivat- 

a Plutarch. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



209 



ing their lands, and knowing that their servitude was not to 
increase; they imagined, Ukewise, that the masters would be 
better citizens, when they desired no more than what they were 
accustomed to enjoy. 

5. — Of a Monarchy in the like Case 

When the nobles of a monarchical state cause the lands to 
be cultivated for their own use by a conquered people, they 
ought never to have the power of increasing the service or 
tribute.^ Besides, it is right the prince should be satisfied with 
his own demesne and the military service. But if he wants to 
raise taxes on the vassals of his nobility, the lords of the sev- 
eral districts ought to be answerable for the tax,f and be obliged 
to pay it for the vassals, by whom they may be afterwards re- 
imbursed. If this rule be not followed, the lord and the collec- 
tors of the public taxes will harass the poor vassal by turns till 
he perishes with misery or flies into the woods. 

6. — Of a despotic Government in the like Case 

The foregoing rule is still more indispensably necessary in a 
despotic government. The lord who is every moment liable 
to be stripped of his lands and his vassals is not so eager to 
preserve them. 

When Peter I thought proper to follow the custom of Ger- 
many, and to demand his taxes in money, he made a very pru- 
dent regulation, which is still followed in Russia. The gen- 
tleman levies the tax on the peasant, and pays it to the Czar. 
If the number of peasants diminishes, he pays all the same; 
if it increases, he pays no more ; so that it is his interest not 
to worry or oppress his vassals. 

7. — Of Taxes in Countries where Villanage is not established 

When tlie inhabitants of a state are all free subjects, and each 
man enjoys his property with as much right as the prince his 
sovereignty, taxes may then be laid either on persons, on lands, 
on merchandise, on two of these, or on all three together. 

In the taxing of persons, it would be an unjust proportion to 

fcTViis is what induced Charlemagne this hrad. See the fifth book of the 
io make his excellent institution upon " Capitularies, " art. 303. 

f This is the practice in Germany. 

Vol. I. — 14 



2IO MONTESQUIEU 

conform exactly to that of property. At Athens the people 
were divided into four classes. cf Those who drew five hundred 
measures of liquid or dried fruit from their estates paid a talent e 
to the public ; those who drew three hundred measures paid 
half a talent ; those who had two hundred measures paid ten 
minse ; those of the fourth class paid nothing at all. The tax 
was fair, though it was not proportionable : if it did not follow 
the measure of people's property, it followed that of their wants. 
It was judged that every man had an equal share of what was 
necessary for nature, that whatsoever was necessary for nature 
ought not to be taxed ; that to this succeeded the useful, which 
ought to be taxed, but less than the superfluous ; and that the 
largeness of the taxes on what was superfluous prevented super- 
fluity. 

In the taxing of lands it is customary to make lists or regis- 
ters, in which the different classes of estates are ranged. But 
it is very difficult to know these differences, and still more so to 
find people that are not interested in mistaking them. Here, 
therefore, are two sorts of injustice, that of the man and that 
of the thing. But if in general the tax be not exorbitant, and 
the people continue to have plenty of necessaries, these partic- 
ular acts of injustice will do no harm. On the contrary, if the 
people are permitted to enjoy only just what is necessary for 
subsistence, the least disproportion will be of the greatest con- 
sequence. 

If some subjects do not pay enough, the mischief is not so 
great ; their convenience and ease turn always to the public 
advantage ; if some private people pay too much, their ruin 
redounds to the public detriment. If the government propor- 
tions its fortune to that of individuals, the ease and conven- 
ience of the latter will soon make its fortune rise. The whole 
depends upon a critical moment : shall the state begin with im- 
poverishing the subjects to enrich itself? Or had it better wait 
to be enriched by its subjects? Is it more advisable for it to 
have the former or the latter advantage? Which shall it choose 
— to begin or to end with opulence ? 

The duties felt least by the people are those on merchandise, 
because they are not demanded of them in form. They may 
be so prudently managed that the people themselves shall 

d Pollux, book VIIT. chap. x. art. 130. e Or 60 minae. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 211 

hardly know they pay them. For this purpose it is of the ut- 
most consequence that the person who sells the merchandise 
should pay the duty. He is very sensible that he does not pay 
it for himself ; and the consumer, who pays it in the main, con- 
founds it with the price. Some authors have observed that 
Nero had abolished the duty of the five-and-twentieth part 
arising from the sale of slaves ;f and yet he had only ordained 
that it should be paid by the seller instead of the purchaser ; 
this regulation, which left the impost entire, seemed, never- 
theless, to suppress it. 

There are two states in Europe where the imposts are very 
heavy upon liquors : in one the brewer alone pays the duty, 
in the other it is levied indiscriminately upon all the consum- 
ers ; in the first nobody feels the rigor of the impost, in the 
second it is looked upon as a grievance ; in the former the sub- 
ject is sensible only of the liberty he has of not paying, in the 
latter he feels only the necessity that compels him to pay. 

Further, the obliging the consumers to pay requires a per- 
petual rummaging and searching into their houses. Now noth- 
ing is more contrary than this to liberty ; and those who es- 
tablish these sorts of duties have not surely been so happy as to 
hit upon the best method of collecting the revenue. 

8. — In zvhat Manner the Deception is preserved 

In order to make the purchaser confound the price of the 
commodity with the impost, there must be some proportion 
between the impost and the value of the commodity : for which 
reason there ought not to be an excessive duty upon merchan- 
dise of little value. There are countries in which the duty ex- 
ceeds seventeen or eighteen times the value of the commodity. 
In this case the prince removes the disguise : his subjects plainly 
see they are dealt with in an unreasonable manner, which ren- 
ders them most exquisitely sensible of their servile condition. 

Besides, the prince, to be able to levy a duty so dispropor- 
tioned to the value of the commodity, must be himself the ven- 
dor, and the people must not have it in their power to purchase 
it elsewhere : a practice subject to a thousand inconveniences. 

_ ^ " Vectigal quint&lt;x ct vicesimse vena- dere jubcretur, in parfem pretii emp- 
lium mancipioriim remissum specie toribus accrescebat. — Tacit. " /\nnal." 
magis, quam vi, quia cum venditor pen- lib. XIII. 



212 MONTESQUIEU 

Smuggling being in this case extremely lucrative, the natural 
and most reasonable penalty, namely, the confiscation of the 
merchandise, becomes incapable of putting a stop to it ; es- 
pecially as this very merchandise is intrinsically of inconsider- 
able value. Recourse must, therefore, be had to extravagant 
punishments, such as those inflicted for capital crimes. 

All proportion then of penalties is at an end. Persons that 
cannot really be considered as vicious are punished like the 
most infamous criminals ; which of all things in the world is 
the most contrary to the spirit of a moderate government. 

Again, in proportion as people are tempted to cheat the 
farmer of the revenues, the more the latter is enriched, and the 
former impoverished. To put a stop to smuggling, the farmer 
must be invested with extraordinary means of oppressing, and 
then the country is ruined. 

9. — Of a had Kind of Impost 

We shall here, by the way, take notice of an impost laid in 
particular countries on the different articles of civil contracts. 
As these are things subject to very nice disquisitions, a vast 
deal of knowledge is necessary to make any tolerable defence 
against the farmer of the revenues, who interprets, in that case, 
the regulations of the prince, and exercises an arbitrary power 
over people's fortunes. Experience has demonstrated that a 
duty on the paper on which the deeds are drawn would be of 
far greater service. 

10. — That the Greatness of Taxes depends on the Nature of 

the Government 

Taxes ought to be very light in despotic governments : 
otherwise who would be at the trouble of tilling the land ? Be- 
sides, how is it possible to pay heavy duties in a government 
that makes no manner of return to the different contributions 
of the subject? 

The exorbitant power of the prince, and the extreme depres- 
sion of the people, require that there should not be even a pos- 
sibility of the least mistake between them. The taxes ought to 
be so easy to collect, and so clearly settled, as to leave no op- 
portunity for the collectors to increase or diminish them. A 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



213 



portion of the fruits of the earth, a capitation, a duty of so much 
per cent, on merchandise, are the only taxes suitable to that 
government. 

Merchants in despotic countries ought to have a personal 
safeguard, to which all due respect should be paid. Without 
this they would be too weak to dispute with the custom-house 
officers. 

II. — Of Confiscations 

With respect to confiscations, there is one thing very par- 
ticular, that, contrary to the general custom, they are more 
severe in Europe than in Asia. In Europe not only the mer- 
chandise, but even sometimes the ships and carriages, are con- 
fiscated ; which is never practised in Asia. This is because in 
Europe the merchant can have recourse to magistrates, who 
are able to shelter him from oppression ; in Asia the magis- 
trates themselves would be the greatest oppressors. What 
remedy could a merchant have against a pasha who was deter- 
mined to confiscate his goods? 

The prince, therefore, checks his own power, finding him- 
self under the necessity of acting with some kind of lenity. In 
Turkey they raise only a single duty for the importation of 
goods, and afterwards the whole country is open to the mer- 
chant. Smuggling is not attended with confiscation or increase 
of duty. In China g they never look into the baggage of those 
who are not merchants. Defrauding the customs in the ter- 
ritory of the Mogul is not punished with confiscation, but with 
doubling the duty. The princes of Tartary, who reside in 
towns, impose scarcely any duty at all on the goods that pass 
through their country. i^i In Japan, it is true, to cheat the cus- 
toms is a capital crime ; but this is because they have particular 
reasons for prohibiting all communication with foreigners ; 
hence the fraud i is rather a contravention of the laws made for 
the security of the government than of those of commerce. 

g Father Du Halde, torn, ii. p. 37. nations for that purpose — the Dutch for 

/i " History of the Tartars," part Til. tlie commerce of Europe, and the Chi- 

p; 290. nese for that of Asia; they confine the 

t Being willing to trade with foreign- factors and sailors in a kind of prison, 

ers without having any communication and lay such a restraint upon them as 

with them, they have pitched upon two tires their patience. 



2 14 MONTESQUIEU 

12. — Relation between the Weight of Taxes and Liberty 

It is a general rule that taxes may be heavier in proportion 
to the liberty of the subject, and that there is a necessity for 
reducing them in proportion to the increase of slavery. This 
has always been and always will be the case. It is a rule de- 
rived from nature that never varies. We find it in all parts, — 
in England, in Holland, and in every state where liberty gradu- 
ally declines, till we come to Turkey. Switzerland seems to be 
an exception to this rule, because they pay no taxes ; but the 
particular reason for that exemption is well known, and even 
confirms what I have advanced. In those barren mountains 
provisions are so dear, and the country is so populous, that a 
Swiss pays four times more to nature than a Turk does to the 
sultan. 

A conquering people, such as were formerly the Athenians 
and the Romans, may rid themselves of all taxes as they reign 
over vanquished nations. Then, indeed, they do not pay in 
proportion to their liberty, because in this respect they are no 
longer a people, but a monarch. 

But the general rule still holds good. In moderate govern- 
ments there is an indemnity for the weight of the taxes, which 
is liberty. In despotic countriesa there is an equivalent for 
liberty, which is the lightness of the taxes. 

In some monarchies in Europe there aveb particular prov- 
inces which from the very nature of their civil government are 
in a more flourishing condition than the rest. It is pretended 
that these provinces are not sufficiently taxed, because through 
the goodness of their government they are able to be taxed 
higher ; hence the ministers seem constantly to aim at depriv- 
ing them of this very government whence a diffusive blessing 
is derived, which redounds even to the prince's advantage. 

13- — ^" zvhat Government Taxes are capable of Increase 

Taxes may be increased in most republics, because the citi- 
zen, who thinks he is paying himself, cheerfully submits to 

"In Russia the taxes are but small; fc The pays d'etats, where the states 

they have been increased since the of the province assemble to deliberate 
despotic power of the prince is exercised on public affairs, 
with more moderation. See the " His- 
tory of the Tartars," part II. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 215 

them, and moreover is generally able to bear their weight, from 
the nature of the government. 

In a monarchy taxes may be increased, because the modera^ 
tion of the government is capable of procuring opulence : it is 
a recompense, as it were, granted to the prince for the respect 
he shows to the laws. In despotic governments they cannot be 
increased, because there can be no increase of the extremity of 
slavery. 

14. — That the Nature of the Taxes is in Relation to the 

Government 

A capitation is more natural to slavery ; a duty on merchan- 
dise is more natural to liberty, by reason it has not so direct a 
relation to the person. 

It is natural in a despotic government for the prince not to 
give money to his soldiers, or to those belonging to his court ; 
but to distribute lands amongst them, and of course that there 
should be very few taxes. But if the prince gives money, the 
most natural tax he can raise is a capitation, which can never 
be considerable. For as it is impossible to make different 
classes of the contributors, because of the abuses that might 
arise thence, considering the injustice and violence of the gov- 
ernment, they are under an absolute necessity of regulating 
themselves by the rate of what even the poorest and most 
wretched are able to contribute. 

The natural tax of moderate governments is the duty laid 
on merchandise. As this is really paid by the consumer, though 
advanced by the merchant, it is a loan which the latter has al- 
ready made to the former. Hence the merchant must be con- 
sidered on the one side as the general debtor of the state, and 
on the other as the creditor of every individual. He advances 
to the state the duty which the consumer will some time or 
other refund : and he has paid for the consumer the duty which 
he has advanced for the merchandise. It is, therefore, obvious 
that in proportion to the moderation of the government, to the 
prevalence of the spirit of liberty, and to the security of private 
fortunes, a merchant has it in his power to advance money to 
the state, and to pay considerable duties for individuals. In 
England a merchant lends really to the government fifty or 
sixty pounds sterling for every tun of wine he imports. Where 



2i6 MONTESQUIEU 

is the merchant that would dare do any such thing in a coun- 
try Hke Turkey ? And were he so presumptuous, how could 
he do it with a crazy or shattered fortune ? 

15. — Abuse of Liberty 

To these great advantages of liberty it is owing that liberty 
itself has been abused. Because a moderate government has 
been productive of admirable effects, this moderation has been 
laid aside ; because great taxes have been raised, they wanted 
to carry them to excess ; and ungrateful to the hand of liberty, 
of whom they received this present, they addressed themselves 
to slavery, who never grants the least favor. 

Liberty produces excessive taxes ; the effect of excessive 
taxes is slavery ; and slavery produces a diminution of tribute. 

Most of the edicts of the eastern monarchs are to exempt 
every year some province of their empire from paying tribute. f 
The manifestations of their wills are favors. But in Europe the 
edicts of princes are disagreeable even before they are seen, 
because they always make mention of their own wants, but 
not a word of ours. 

From an unpardonable indolence in the ministers of those 
countries, owing to the nature of the government, and fre- 
quently to the climate, the people derive this advantage, that 
they are not incessantly plagued with new demands. The pub- 
lic expense does not increase, because the ministers do not form 
new projects : and if some by chance are formed, they are such 
as are soon executed. The governors of the state do not per- 
petually torment the people, for they do not perpetually tor- 
ment themselves. But it is impossible there should be any 
fixed rule in our finances, since we always know that we shall 
have something or other to execute, without ever knowing 
what it is. 

It is no longer customary with us to give the appellation of 
a great minister to a wise dispenser of the public revenues, but 
to a person of dexterity and cunning, who is clever at finding 
out what we call the ways and means. 

c This is the practice of the emperors annual exemptions, and not perpetuaL 
of China. The author speaks here of —Ed. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 217 

16. — Of the Conquests of the Mahommedans 

It was this excess of taxesc? that occasioned the prodigious 
facihty with which the Mahommedans carried on their con- 
quests. Instead of a continual series of extortions devised by 
the subtle avarice of the Greek emperors, the people were sub- 
jected to a simple tribute which was paid and collected with 
ease. Thus they were far happier in obeying a barbarous na- 
tion than a corrupt government, in which they suffered every 
inconvenience of lost liberty, with all the horror of present 
slavery. 

17. — Of the Augmentation of Troops 

A new distemper has spread itself over Europe, infecting 
our princes, and inducing them to keep up an exorbitant num- 
ber of troops. It has its redoublings, and of necessity becomes 
contagious. For as soon as one prince augments his forces, 
the rest, of course, do the same ; so that nothing is gained 
thereby but the public ruin. Each monarch keeps as many 
armies on foot as if his people were in danger of being exter- 
minated : and they give the name of peaces to this general 
effort of all against all. Thus is Europe ruined to such a degree 
that were private people to be in the same situation as the 
three most opulent powers of this part of the globe, they would 
not have necessary subsistence. We are poor with the riches 
and commerce of the whole world ; and soon, by thus augment- 
ing our troops, we shall be all soldiers, and be reduced to the 
very same situation as the Tartars.^ 

Great princes, not satisfied with hiring or buying troops of 
petty states, make it their business on all sides to pay subsidies 
for alliances, that is, generally to throw away their money. 

The consequence of such a situation is the perpetual aug- 
mentation of taxes ; and the mischief which prevents all future 
remedy is, that they reckon no more upon their revenues, but 
in waging war against their whole capital. It is no unusual 
thing to see governments mortgage their funds even in time 

d See in history the greatness, the f All that is wanting for this is to 

oddity, and even the folly of those taxes. improve the new invention of the militia 

Anastasius invented a tax for brcathinp, establislied in most parts of Europe, and 

" ut quiscjue pro haustu aeris pcndtrct." carry it to the same excess as they dO 

e True it is that this state of effort is the regular troops, 
the chief support of the balance, be- 
cause it checks the great powers. 



2i8 MONTESQUIEU 

of peace, and to employ what they call extraordinary means to 
ruin themselves — means so extraordinary, indeed, that such 
are hardly thought of by the most extravagant young spend- 
thrift. 

i8. — Of an Exemption from Taxes 

The maxim of the great eastern empires, of exempting such 
provinces as have very much suffered from taxes, ought to be 
extended to monarchical states. There are some, indeed, 
where this practice is established ; yet the country is more op- 
pressed than if no such rule took place ; because as the prince 
levies still neither more nor less, the state becomes bound for 
the whole. In order to ease a village that pays badly, they load 
another that pays better ; the former is not relieved, and the 
latter is ruined. The people grow desperate between the 
necessity of paying for fear of exactions, and the danger of pay- 
ing for fear of new burdens. 

A well-regulated government ought to set aside, for the first 
article of its expense, a determinate sum to answer contingent 
cases. It is with the public as with individuals, who are ruined 
when they live up exactly to their income. 

With regard to an obligation for the whole amongst the in- 
habitants of the same village, some pretend g that it is but rea- 
sonable, because there is a possibility of a fraudulent combina- 
tion on their side : but was it ever heard that, upon mere sup- 
position, we are to establish a thing in itself unjust and ruinous 
to the state? 

19. — Which is more suitable to the Prince and to the People, 
the farming the Revenues, or managing them by Commission 

The managing of the revenues by commission is like the con- 
duct of a good father of a family, who collects his own rents 
himself with economy and order. 

By this management of the revenues the prince is at liberty 
to press or to retard the levy of the taxes, either according to 
his own wants or to those of his people. By this he saves to 
the state the immense profits of the farmers, who impoverish 
it in a thousand ways. By this he prevents the people from 

g See a treatise on the " Roman Finances," chap. ii. Printed at Paris 
by BrJasson, 1740. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 219 

being mortified with the sight of sudden fortunes. By this 
the pubhc money passes through few hands, goes directly to 
the treasury, and consequently makes a quicker return to the 
people. By this the prince avoids an infinite number of bad 
laws extorted from him by the importunate avarice of the 
farmers, who pretend to offer a present advantage for regula- 
tions pernicious to posterity. 

As the moneyed man is always the most powerful, the farmer 
renders himself arbitrary even over the prince himself; he is 
not the legislator, but he obliges the legislator to give laws. 

I acknowledge that it is sometimes of use to farm out a new 
duty, for there is an art in preventing frauds, which motives of 
interest suggest to the farmers, but commissioners never think 
of. Now the manner of levying it being once established by 
the farmer, it may afterwards be safely intrusted to a commis- 
sion. In England the management of the Excise and of the 
Post-office was borrowed from that of the farmers of the rev- 
enue. 

In republics the revenues of the state are generally managed 
by commission. The contrary practice was a great defect in 
the Roman government./^ In despotic governments the peo- 
ple are infinitely happier where this management is established 
— witness Persia and China.* The unhappiest of all are those 
where the prince farms out his sea-ports and trading cities. 
The history of monarchies abounds with mischiefs done by the 
farmers of the revenue. 

Incensed at the oppressive extortions of the publicans, Nero 
formed a magnanimous but impracticable scheme of abolish- 
ing all kinds of imposts. He did not think of managing the 
revenues by commissioners, but he made four edicts :;" that the 
laws enacted against publicans, which had hitherto been kept 
secret, should be promulgated ; that they should exact no 
claims for above a year backward ; that there should be a 
pretor established to determine their pretensions without any 
formality ; and that the merchants should pay no duty for their 
vessels. These were the halcyon days of that emperor. 

h Csesar was obliged to remove the governed pursuant to the ancient plan, 

publicans from the province of Asia, obtained to be of the number of those 

and to establish there another kind of which the emperor governed by his 

rcRulation. as we learn from Dio; and officers. 

Tacitus informs us that Macedonia and i See Sir John Chardin's " Travels 

Achaia, provinces left by AuRUstus to through I'ersin." torn. vi. 

the people of Rome, and consequently ; Tacitus, " Annal." XIII. 



220 MONTESQUIEU 

20. — Of the Farmers of the Revenues 

When the lucrative profession of a farmer of the revenue 
becomes Hkewise a post of honor, the state is ruined. It may 
do well enough in despotic governments, where this employ- 
ment is oftentimes exercised by the governors themselves. 
But it is by no means proper in a republic, since a custom of 
the like nature destroyed that of Rome. Nor is it better in 
monarchies, nothing being more opposite to the spirit of this 
government. All the other orders of the state are dissatisfied ; 
honor loses its whole value ; the gradual and natural means of 
distinction are no longer respected ; and the very principle of 
the government is subverted. 

It is true, indeed, that scandalous fortunes were raised in 
former times ; but this was one of the calamities of the Fifty 
Years' War. These riches were then considered as ridiculous ; 
now we admire them. 

Every profession has its particular lot. That of the tax- 
gatherers is wealth ; and wealth is its own reward. Glory and 
honor fall to the share of that nobility who are sensible of no 
other happiness. Respect and esteem are for those ministers 
and magistrates whose whole life is a continued series of labor, 
and who watch day and night over the welfare of the empire. 



BOOK XIV 

OF LAWS IN RELATION TO THE NATURE OF 

THE CLIMATE 

I. — General Idea 

IF it be true that the temper of the mind and the passions 
of the heart are extremely different in different chmates, 
the laws ought to be in relation both to the variety of those 
passions and to the variety of those tempers. 

2. — Of the Difference of Men in different Climates 

Cold air constringes the extremities of the external fibres 
of the body ;« this increases their elasticity, and favors the re- 
turn of the blood from the extreme parts to the heart. It con- 
tractsfr those very fibres ; consequently it increases also their 
force. On the contrary, warm air relaxes and lengthens the 
extremes of the fibres ; of course it diminishes their force and 
elasticity. 

People are, therefore, more vigorous in cold climates. Here 
the action of the heart and the reaction of the extremities of 
the fibres are better performed, the temperature of the humors 
is greater, the blood moves more freely towards the heart, and 
reciprocally the heart has more power. This superiority of 
strength must produce various effects ; for instance, a greater 
boldness, that is, more courage ; a greater sense of superiority, 
that is, less desire of revenge ; a greater opinion of security, 
that is, more frankness, less suspicion, policy, and cunning. In 
short, this must be productive of very different tempers. Put 
a man into a close, warm place, and for the reasons above given 
he will feel a great faintness. If under this circumstance vou 
l^ropose a bold enterprise to him, I believe you will find him 

n This appears even in the counte- b We know that it shortens iron, 

nance: in cold weather people look thin- 
ner. 

221 



222 MONTESQUIEU 

very little disposed towards it ; his present weakness will throw 
him into despondency ; he will be afraid of everything, being 
in a state of total incapacity. The inhabitants of warm coun- 
tries are, like old men, timorous ; the people in cold countries 
are, like young- men, brave. If we reflect on the late wars,c 
which are more recent in our memory, and in which we can bet- 
ter distinguish some particular effects that escape us at a greater 
distance of time, we shall find that the northern people, trans- 
planted into southern regj,ons,&lt;^ did not perform such exploits 
as their countrymen, who, fighting in their own climate, pos- 
sessed their full vigor and courage. 

This strength of the fibres in northern nations is the cause 
that the coarser juices are extracted from their ailments. Hence 
two things result : one, that the parts of the chyle or lymph 
are more proper, by reason of their large surface, to be ap- 
plied to and to nourish the fibres ; the other, that they are less 
proper, from their coarseness, to give a certain subtility to the 
nervous juice. Those people have, therefore, large bodies and 
but little vivacity. 

The nerves that terminate from all parts in the cutis form 
each a nervous bundle ; generally speaking, the whole nerve 
is not moved, but a very minute part. In warm climates, where 
the cutis is relaxed, the ends of the nerves are expanded and 
laid open to the weakest action of the smallest objects. In cold 
countries the cutis is constringed and the papillae compressed : 
the miliary glands are in some measure paralytic ; and the 
sensation does not reach the brain, except when it is very strong 
and proceeds from the whole nerve at once. Now, imagina- 
tion, taste, sensibility, and vivacity depend on an infinite num- 
ber of small sensations. 

I have observed the outermost part of a sheep's tongue, 
where, to the naked eye, it seems covered with papillae. On 
these papillae I have discerned through a microscope small 
hairs, or a kind of down ; between the papillae were pyramids 
shaped towards the ends like pincers. Very likely these pyra- 
mids are the principal organ of taste. 

I caused the half of this tongue to be frozen, and observing 
it with the naked eye I found the papillae considerably dimin- 

c Those for the succession to the d For instance, in Spain. 

Spanish monarchy. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



223 



ished : even some rows of them were sunk into their sheath. 
The outermost part I examined with the microscope, and per- 
ceived no pyramids. In proportion as the frost went off, the 
papillae seemed to the naked eye to rise, and with the micro- 
scope the miliary glands began to appear. 

This observation confirms what I have been saying, that in 
cold countries the nervous glands are less expanded: they 
sink deeper into their sheaths, or they are sheltered from the 
action of external objects; consequently they have not such 
lively sensations. 

In cold countries they have very little sensibility for pleas- 
ure ; in temperate countries, they have more ; in warm coun- 
tries, their sensibility is exquisite. As climates are distin- 
guished by degrees of latitude, we might distinguish them 
also in some measure by those of sensibility. I have been at the 
opera in England and in Italy, where I have seen the same 
pieces and the same performers ; and yet the same music pro- 
duces such different effects on the two nations : one is so cold 
and phlegmatic, and the other so lively and enraptured, that 
it seems almost inconceivable. 

It is the same with regard to pain, which is excited by the 
laceration of some fibre of the body. The Author of nature has 
made it an established rule that this pain should be more acute 
in proportion as the laceration is greater : now it is evident that 
the large bodies and coarse fibres of the people of the North 
are less capable of laceration than the delicate fibres of the in- 
habitants of warm countries ; consequently the soul is there 
less sensible of pain. You must flay a Muscovite alive to make 
him feel. 

From this delicacy of organs peculiar to warm climates it 
follows that the soul is most sensibly moved by whatever re- 
lates to the union of the two sexes : here everything leads to 
this object. 

In northern climates scarcely has the animal part of love a 
power of making itself felt. Tn temperate climates, love, at- 
tended by a thousand appendages, endeavors to please by 
things that have at first the appearance, though not the reality, 
of this passion. In warmer climates it is liked for its own sake, 
it is the only cause of happiness, it is life itself. 

In southern countries a machine of a delicate frame but 



2 24 MONTESQUIEU 

strong sensibility resigns itself either to a love which rises and 
is incessantly laid in a seraglio, or to a passion which leaves 
women in a greater independence, and is consequently exposed 
to a thousand inquietudes. In northern regions a machine ro- 
bust and heavy finds pleasure in whatever is apt to throw the 
spirits into motion, such as hunting, travelling, war, and wine. 
If we travel towards the North, we meet with people who have 
few vices, many virtues, and a great share of frankness and sin- 
cerity. If we draw near the South, we fancy ourselves entirely 
removed from the verge of morality ; here the strongest pas- 
sions are productive of all manner of crimes, each man en- 
deavoring, let the means be what they will, to indulge his in- 
ordinate desires. In temperate climates we find the inhabitants 
inconstant in their manners, as well as in their vices and virtues : 
the climate has not a quality determinate enough to fix them. 
The heat of the climate may be so excessive as to deprive 
the body of all vigor and strength. Then the faintness is com- 
municated to the mind ; there is no curiosity, no enterprise, no 
generosity of sentiment ; the inclinations are all passive ; in- 
dolence constitutes the utmost happiness; scarcely any pun- 
ishment is so severe as mental employment; and slavery is 
more supportable than the force and vigor of mind necessary 
for human conduct. 

3. — Contradiction in the Tempers of some Southern Nations 

The Indians^ are naturally a pusillanimous people ; even the 
children/' of Europeans born in India lose the courage peculiar 
to their own climate. But how shall we reconcile this with their 
customs and penances so full of barbarity? The men volun- 
tarily undergo the greatest hardships, and the women burn 
themselves : here we find a very odd compound of fortitude and 
weakness. 

Nature, having framed those people of a texture so weak 
as to fill them with timidity, has formed them at the same time 
of an imagination so Hvely that every object makes the strong- 
est impression upon them. That delicacy of organs which 
renders them apprehensive of death contributes likewise to 

e " One hundred European soldiers," f Even the Persians who settle in the 

says Tavernier, " would without any Indies contract in the third generation 
great difficulty beat a thousand Indian the indolence and cowardice of the 
soldiers." Indians. See Bernier on the " Mogul," 

torn. i. p. 182. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 225 

make them dread a thousand things more than death : the very 
same sensibihty induces them to fly and dare all dangers. 

As a good education is more necessary to children than to 
such as have arrived at maturity of understanding, so the in- 
habitants of those countries have much greater need than the 
European nations of a wiser legislator. The greater their sen- 
sibility, the more it behooves them to receive proper impres- 
sions, to imbibe no prejudices, and to let themselves be directed 
by reason. 

At the time of the Romans the inhabitants of the north of 
Europe were destitute of arts, education, and almost of laws ; 
and'yet the good sense annexed to the gross fibres of those 
climates enabled them to make an admirable stand against the 
power of Rome, till the memorable period in which they quitted 
their woods to subvert that great empire. 

4. — Cause of the Immutability of Religion, Manners, Customs, 
and Lazvs in the Eastern Countries 

If to that delicacy of organs which renders the eastern na- 
tions so susceptible of every impression you add likewise a 
sort of indolence of mind, naturally connected with that of the 
bodv, by means of which they grow incapable of any exertion 
or effort, it is easy to comprehend that when once the soul has 
received an impression it cannot change it. This is the reason 
that the laws, manners, and customs,^ even those which seem 
quite indififerent, such as their mode of dress, are the same 
to this very day in eastern countries as they were a thousand 
years ago. 

5. — That those are bad Legislators who favor the Vices of the 
Climate, and good Legislators zvho oppose those Vices 

The Indians believe that repose and non-existence are the 
foundation of all things, and the end in which they terminate. 
Hence they consider entire inaction as the most perfect of all 
states, and the object of their desires. To the Supreme Being 
they give the title of immovable./i The inhabitants of Siam 

g We find by a fragment of Nicolaus a Governor who had piven any displeas- 

Damascenus, collected by Constantine ure; it was in the timi- of the Medes. 

PorphyroRenitus, that it was an ancient It Panamanack: Sec Kircher. 
custom in the East to send to strangle 

Vol. I. — 15 



2 26 MONTESQUIEU 

believe that their utmost happinessi consists in not being 
obhged to animate a machine or to give motion to a body. 

In those countries where the excess of heat enervates and 
exhausts the body, rest is so dehcious, and motion so painful, 
that this system of metaphysics seems natural ; and Foe,/ the 
legislator of the Indies, was directed by his own sensations 
when he placed mankind in a state extremely passive ; but his 
doctrine arising from the laziness of the climate favored it also 
in its turn ; which has been the source of an infinite deal of mis- 
chief. 

The legislators of China were more rational when, consider- 
ing men not in the peaceful state which they are to enjoy here- 
after, but in the situation proper for discharging the several 
duties of life, they made their religion, philosophy, and laws 
all practical. The more the physical causes incline mankind 
to inaction, the more the moral causes should estrange them 
from it. 

6. — Of Agriculture in zvarm Climates 

Agriculture is the principal labor of man. The more the 
climate inclines him to shun this labor, the more the religion 
and laws of the country ought to incite him to it. Thus the 
Indian laws, which give the lands to the prince, and destroy 
the spirit of property among the subjects, increase the bad 
efifects of the climate, that is, their natural indolence. 

7. — Of Monkery 

The very same mischiefs result from monkery : it had its rise 
in the warm countries of the East, where they are less inclined 
to action than to speculation. 

In Asia the number of dervishes or monks seems to increase 
together with the warmth of the climate. The Indies, where 
the heat is excessive, are full of them ; and the same difiference 
is found in Europe. 

In order to surmount the laziness of the climate, the laws 
ought to endeavor to remove all means of subsisting without 

iLa Loubiere, "Relation of Siam," etc., but perfection requires that these 

p. 446. members should be inactive." This is 

j Foe endeavored to reduce the heart taken from the dialogue of a Chinese 

to a mere vacuum: " We have eyes and philosopher, quoted by Father Du 

ears, but perfection consists in neither Halde, tom. iii. 
seeing nor hearing; a mouth, hands, 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 227 

labor: but in the southern parts of Europe they act quite the 
reverse. To those who want to Hve in a state of indolence, they 
afford retreats the most proper for a speculative life, and endow 
them with immense revenues. These men who live in the midst 
of plenty which they know not how to enjoy, are in the right 
to give their superfluities away to the common people. The 
poor are bereft of property ; and these men indemnify them by 
supporting them in idleness, so as to make them even grow 
fond of their misery, 

8. — An excellent Custom of China 

The historical relations^' of China mention a ceremony' of 
opening the ground which the emperor performs every year. 
The design of this public and solemn act is to excite the peo- 
ple to tillage.^ 

Further, the emperor is every year informed of the hus- 
bandman who has distinguished himself most in his profession ; 
and he makes him a mandarin of the eighth order. 

Among the ancient Persians" the kings quitted their gran- 
deur and pomp on the eighth day of the month, called Chor- 
rcm-ruc, to eat with the husbandmen. These institutions were 
admirably calculated for the encouragement of agriculture. 



9. — Means of encouraging Industry 

We shall show, in the nineteenth book, that lazy nations are 
generally proud. Now the effect might well be turned against 
the cause, and laziness be destroyed by pride. In the south of 
Europe, where people have such a high notion of the point of 
honor, it would be right to give prizes to husbandmen who 
had excelled in agriculture ; or to artists who had made the 
greatest improvements in their several professions. This prac- 
tice has succeeded in our days in Ireland, where it has estab- 
lished one of the most considerable linen manufactures in Eu- 
rope. 

t Father Du Haldc, "History of w Venty, the third Emperor of the 

China." torn. i. p. 72. third dynasty, tilled the lands himself. 

/ Several of the kings of India do the and made the Empress and his wives 
same. " Relation of the Kingdom of em[)lov their time in the silkworks in 
Siam," by La Loubiere, p. 69. his palace. " History of China." 

n liyde, " Religion of the Persians." 



228 



MONTESQUIEU 



lo. — Of the Laws in relation to the Sobriety of the People 

In warm countries the aqueous part of the blood loses itself 
greatly by perspiration ;o it must, therefore, be supplied by 
a like liquid. Water is there of admirable use ; strong liquors 
would congeal the globules/' of blood that remain after the tran- 
suding of the aqueous humor. 

In cold countries the aqueous part of the blood is very little 
evacuated by perspiration. They may, therefore, make use of 
spirituous liquors, without which the blood would congeal. 
They are full of humors ; consequently strong liquors, which 
give a motion to the blood, are proper for those countries. 

The law of Mahomet, which prohibits the drinking of wine, 
is, therefore, fitted to the climate of Arabia : and, indeed, before 
Mahomet's time, water was the common drink of the Arabs. 
The law« which forbade the Carthaginians to drink wine was 
a law of the climate ; and, indeed, the climate of those two 
countries is pretty nearly the same. 

Such a law would be improper for cold countries, where the 
climate seems to force them to a kind of national intemperance, 
very dififerent from personal ebriety. Drunkenness predomi- 
nates throughout the world, in proportion to the coldness and 
humidity of the climate. Go from the equator to the north 
pole, and you will find this vice increasing together with the 
degree of latitude. Go from the equator again to the south 
pole, and you will find the same vice travelling south,&amp; exactly 
in the same proportion. 

It is very natural that where wine is contrary to the climate, 
and consequently to health, the excess of it should be more 
severely punished than in countries where intoxication pro- 
duces very few bad effects to the person, fewer to the society, 
and where it does not make people frantic and wild, but only 
stupid and heavy. Hence those lawsc which inflicted a double 



o Monsieur Bernier, travelling from 
Lahore to Cashmere, wrote thus: " My 
body is a sieve; scarcely have I swal- 
lowed a pint of water, but I see it tran- 
sude like dew out of all my limbs, even 
to my fingers' ends. I drink ten pints 
a day, and it does me no manner of 
harm."— Bernier's " Travels," torn. ii. 
p. 261. 

p In the blood there are red globules, 
fibrous parts, white globules, and water, 
in which the whole swims. 



a Plato, book II. of "Laws"; Aris- 
totle, of the care of domestic affairs; 
Eusebius's " Evangelical Preparation," 
book XII. chap. xvii. 

b This is seen in the Hottentots, and 
the inhabitants of the most southern 
part of Chili. 

c As Pittacus did, according to Aris- 
totle, " Polit." lib. I. cap. iii. He lived 
in a climate where drunkenness is not 
a national vice. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 229 

punishment for crimes committed in drunkenness were ap- 
plicable only to a personal, and not to a national, ebriety. A 
German drinks through custom, and a Spaniard by choice. 

In warm countries the relaxing of the fibres produces a great 
evacuation of the liquids, but the solid parts are less transpired. 
The fibres, which act but faintly, and have very little elasticity, 
are not much impaired ; and a small quantity of nutritious juice 
is sufficient to repair them ; for which reason they eat very lit- 
tle. 

It is the variety of wants in different climates that first occa- 
sioned a difference in the manner of living, and this gave rise 
to a variety of laws. Where people are very communicative 
there must be particular laws, and others where there is but 
little communication. 

II. — Of the Laws in relation to the Distempers of the Climate 

Herodotus^ informs us that the Jewish laws concerning the 
leprosy were borrowed from the practice of the Egyptians. 
And, indeed, the same distemper required the same remedies. 
The Greeks and the primitive Romans were strangers to these 
laws, as well as to the disease. The climate of Egypt and 
Palestine rendered them necessary ; and the facility with which 
this disease is spread is sufBcient to make us sensible of the 
wisdom and sagacity of those laws. 

Even we ourselves have felt the effects of them. The Cru- 
sades brought the leprosy amongst us ; but the wise regula- 
tions made at that time hindered it from infecting the mass of 
the people. 

We find by the law of the Lombards^ that this disease was 
spread in Italy before the Crusades, and merited the attention 
of the legislature. Rotharis ordained that a leper should be 
expelled from his house, banished to a particular place, and 
rendered incapable of disposing of his property ; because from 
the very moment he had been turned out of his house he was 
reckoned dead in the eye of the law. In order to prevent all 
communication with lepers, they were rendered incapable of 
civil acts. 

I am apt to think that this disease was brought into Italy 

d Book II. * Book II. tit. i, sec. 3, and tit. 18. sec. i. 



230 MONTESQUIEU 

by the conquests of the Greek emperors, in whose armies there 
might be some soldiers from Palestine or Egypt. Be that as it 
may, the progress of it was stopped till the time of the Cru- 
sades. 

It is related that Pompey's soldiers returning from Syria 
brought a distemper home with them not unlike the leprosy. 
We have no account of any regulation made at that time ; but 
it is highly probable that some such step was taken, since the 
distemper was checked till the time of the Lombards. 

It is now two centuries since a disease unknown to our an- 
cestors was first transplanted from the new world to ours, and 
came to attack human nature even in the very source of life 
and pleasure. Most of the principal families in the south of 
Europe were seen to perish by a distemper that had grown too 
common to be ignominious, and was considered in no other 
light than in that of its being fatal. It was the thirst of gold 
that propagated this disease ; the Europeans went continually 
to America, and always brought back a new leaven of it.^ 

Reasons drawn from religion seemed to require that this 
punishment of guilt should be permitted to continue ; but the 
infection had reached the bosom of matrimony, and given the 
vicious taint even to guiltless infants. 

As it is the business of legislators to watch over the health 
of the citizens, it would have been a wise part in them to have 
stopped this communication by laws made on the plan of those 
of Moses. 

The plague is a disease whose infectious progress is much 
more rapid. Egypt is its principal seat, whence it spreads over 
the whole globe. Most countries in Europe have made exceed- 
ingly good regulations to prevent this infection, and in our 
times an admirable method has been contrived to stop it ; this 
is by forming a line of troops round the infected country, which 
cuts ofif all manner of communication. 

The Turks,g who have no such regulations, see the Christians 
escape this infection in the same town, and none but themselves 
perish ; they buy the clothes of the infected, wear them, and 
proceed in their old way, as if nothing had happened. The 

f It has been thought that this mal- g Ricaut on the " Ottoman Empire," 

ady has a still more ancient origin, and p. 284. 
that it is probable the Spaniards carried 
it to America at the start. — Ed. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 231 

doctrine of a rigid fate, which directs their whole conduct, ren- 
ders the magistrate a quiet spectator; he thinks that every- 
thing comes from the hand of God, and that man has nothing 
more to do than to submit. 



12. — Of the Laws against Stticides 

We do not find in history that the Romans ever killed them- 
selves without a cause ; but the English are apt to commit 
suicide most unaccountably ; they destroy themselves even in 
the bosom of happiness. This action among the Romans was 
the effect of education, being connected with their principles 
and customs ; among the English it is the consequence of a dis- 
temper,/» being connected with the physical state of the ma- 
chine, and independent of every other cause. 

In all probability it is a defect of the filtration of the nervous 
juice : the machine, whose motive faculties are often unex- 
erted, is weary of itself; the soul feels no pain, but a certain 
uneasiness in existing. Pain is a local sensation, which leads 
us to the desire of seeing an end of it ; the burden of life, which 
prompts us to the desire of ceasing to exist, is an evil confined 
to no particular part. 

It is evident that the civil laws of some countries may have 
reasons for branding suicide with infamy : but in England it 
cannot be punished without punishing the effects of madness. 

13. — Effects arising from the Climate of England 

In a nation so distempered by the climate as to have a dis- 
relish of everything, nay, even of life, it is plain that the gov- 
ernment most suitable to the inhabitants is that in which they 
cannot lay their uneasiness to any single person's charge, and 
in which, being under the direction rather of the laws than of 
the prince, it is impossible for them to change the government 
without subverting the laws themselves. 

And if this nation has likewise derived from the climate a 
certain impatience of temper, which renders them incapable 
of bearing the same train of things for any long continuance, 

hit may he complicated with the tmsiipportablc to himself. See Pirard's 
scurvy, wnicli, in some countries es- "Voyages," part IF. chap. xxi. 
pecially, renders a man whimsical and 



232 MONTESQUIEU 

it is obvious that the government above mentioned is the fittest 
for them. 

This impatience of temper is not very considerable of itself; 
but it may become so when joined with courage. 

It is quite a different thing from levity, which makes people 
undertake or drop a project without cause ; it borders more 
upon obstinacy, because it proceeds from so lively a sense of 
misery that it is not weakened even by the habit of suffering. 

This temper in a free nation is extremely proper for discon- 
certing the projects of tyranny ,i which is always slow and feeble 
in its commencement, as in the end it is active and lively ; 
which at first only stretches out a hand to assist, and exerts 
afterwards a multitude of arms to oppress. 

Slavery is ever preceded by sleep. But a people who find no 
rest in any situation, who continually explore every part, and 
feel nothing but pain, can hardly be lulled to sleep. 

Politics are a smooth file, which cuts gradually, and attains 
its end by a slow progression. Now the people of whom we 
have been speaking are incapable of bearing the delays, the 
details, and the coolness of negotiations : in these they are 
more unlikely to succeed than any other nation ; hence they 
are apt to lose by treaties what they obtain by their arms. 

14. — Other Effects of the Climate 

Our ancestors, the ancient Germans, lived in a climate 
where the passions were extremely calm. Their laws decided 
only in such cases where the injury was visible to the eye, and 
went no farther. And as they judged of the outrages done to 
men from the greatness of the wound, they acted with no other 
delicacy in respect to the injuries done to women. The law of 
the Alemans; on this subject is very extraordinary. If a per- 
son uncovers a woman's head, he pays a fine of fifty sous ; if 
he uncovers her leg up to the knee, he pays the same ; and 
double from the knee upwards. One would think that the law 
measured the insults offered to women as we measure a figure 
in geometry ; it did not punish the crime of the imagination, 
but that of the eye. But upon the migration of a German na- 

» Here I take this word for the design is the signification in which it was un- 
of subverting the established power, derstood by the Greeks and Romans, 
and especially that of democracy; this ;' Chap. Iviii. sees, i and 2. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



'■33 



tion into Spain, the climate soon found a necessity for dififerent 
laws. The law of the Visigoths inhibited the surgeons to bleed 
a free woman, except either her father, mother, brother, son, or 
uncle was present. As the imagination of the people grew 
warm, so did that of the legislators; the law suspected every- 
thing when the people had become suspicious. 

These laws had, therefore, a particular regard for the two 
sexes. But in their punishments they seem rather to humor 
the revengeful temper of private persons than to administer 
public justice. Thus, in most cases, they reduced both the crim- 
inals to be slaves to the offended relatives or to the injured 
husband ; a free-born woman^ who had yielded to the embraces 
of a married man was delivered up to his wife to dispose of her 
as she pleased. They obliged the slaves,' if they found their 
master's wife in adultery, to bind her and carry her to her hus- 
band ; they even permitted her childrenw? to be her accusers, 
and her slaves to be tortured in order to convict her. Thus 
their laws were far better adapted to refine, even to excess, a 
certain point of honor than to form a good civil administration. 
We must not, therefore, be surprised if Count Julian was of 
opinion that an afifront of that kind ought to be expiated by the 
ruin of his king and country : we must not be surprised if the 
Moors, with such a conformity of manners, found it so easy 
to settle and to maintain themselves in Spain, and to retard the 
fall of their empire. 

15. — Of the different Confidence ivhich the Lazvs have in the 
People, according to the Difference of Climates 

The people of Japan are of so stubborn and perverse a tem- 
per that neither their legislators nor magistrates can put any 
confidence in them : they set nothing before their eyes but 
judgments, menaces, and chastisements ; every step they take 
is subject to the inquisition of the civil magistrate. Those laws 
which out of five heads of families establish one as a magistrate 
over the other four ; those laws which punish a family or a 
whole ward for a single crime ; those laws, in fine, which find 
nobody innocent where one may happen to be guilty, are made 
with a design to implant in the people a mutual distrust, and 

fe " Law of the Visigoths," book III. /Ibid, book TTT. tit. 4, sec. 6. 

tit. 4, sec. 9. m Ibid, book III. tit. 4, sec. 13. 



234 



MONTESQUIEU 



to make every man the inspector, witness, and judge of his 
neighbor's conduct. 

On the contrary, the people of India are mild,« tender, and 
compassionate. Hence their legislators repose great confi- 
dence in them. They have establishedo very few punishments ; 
these are not severe, nor are they rigorously executed. They 
have subjected nephews to their uncles, and orphans to their 
guardians, as in other countries they are subjected to their 
fathers ; they have regulated the succession by the acknowl- 
edged merit of the successor. They seem to think that every 
individual ought to place entire confidence in the good nature 
of his fellow-subjects./' 

They enfranchise their slaves without difficulty, they marry 
them, they treat them as their children.? Happy climate which 
gives birth to innocence, and produces a lenity in the laws ! 



n See Bernier, torn. ii. p. 140. 

See in the 14th collection of the 
" Edifying Letters," p. 403, the prin- 
cipal laws or customs of the inhabitants 
of the peninsula on this side the 
Ganges. 

p See " Edifying Letters," IX. 378. 
Great exception has been taken to 
Montesquieu's abuse upon the effects 
of climate physically; it is Servan who 
avers that the weakness attributed to 



organisms under the equator is errone- 
ous.— Ed. 

q I had once thought that the lenity 
of slavery in India had made Diodorus 
say that there was neither master nor 
slave in that country; but Diodorus has 
attributed to the whole continent of 
India what, according to Strabo, lib. 
XV., belonged only to a particular 
nation. 



BOOK XV 

IN WHAT MANNER THE LAWS OF CIVIL SLA- 
VERY RELATE TO THE NATURE OF THE CLI- 
MATE 

I. — Of civil Slavery 

SLAVERY, properly so called, is the establishment of a 
right which gives to one man such a power over an- 
other as renders him absolute master of his life and for- 
tune. The state of slaver}' is in its own nature bad. It is 
neither useful to the master nor to the slave ; not to the slave, 
because he can do nothing through a motive of virtue ; nor 
to the master, because by having an unlimited authority over 
his slaves he insensibly accustoms himself to the want of all 
moral virtues, and thence becomes fierce, hasty, severe, chol- 
eric, voluptuous, and cruel. 

In despotic countries, where they are already in a state of 
political servitude, civil slavery is more tolerable than in other 
governments. Every one ought to be satisfied in those coun- 
tries with necessaries and life. Hence the condition of a slave 
is hardly more burdensome than that of a subject. 

But in a monarchical government, where it is of the utmost 
importance that human nature should not be debased or dispir- 
ited, there ought to be no slavery. In democracies, where they 
are all upon equality ; and in aristocracies, where the laws 
ought to use their utmost endeavors to procure as great an 
equality as the nature of the government will permit, slavery 
is contrary to the spirit of the constitution : it only contributes 
to give a power and luxury to the citizens which they ought 
not to have.a 

a Montesquieu seems to have forgot- adopted domestic servitude as the basis 
ten that all the democracies of Greece of social independence.— Ed. 



236 MONTESQUIEU 

2. — Origin of the Right of Slavery among the Roman Civilians 

One would never have imagined that slavery should owe its 
birth to pity, and that this should have been excited in three 
different ways.&amp; 

The law of nations to prevent prisoners from being put to 
death has allowed them to be made slaves. The civil law of 
the Romans empowered debtors, who were subject to be ill 
used by their creditors, to sell themselves. And the law of 
nature requires that children whom a father in a state of servi- 
tude is no longer able to maintain should be reduced to the 
same state as the father. 

These reasons of the civilians are all false. It is false that 
killing in war is lawful, unless in a case of absolute necessity : 
but when a man has made another his slave, he cannot be said 
to have been under a necessity of taking away his life, since 
he actually did not take it away. War gives no other right 
over prisoners than to disable them from doing any further 
harm by securing their persons. All nations c concur in de- 
testing the murdering of prisoners in cold blood. 

Neither is it true that a freeman can sell himself. Sale im- 
plies a price ; now when a person sells himself, his whole 
substance immediately devolves to his master ; the master, 
therefore, in that case, gives nothing, and the slave receives 
nothing. You will say he has a peculium. But this peculium 
goes along with the person. If it is not lawful for a man to kill 
himself because he robs his country of his person, for the same 
reason he is not allowed to barter his freedom. The freedom 
of every citizen constitutes a part of the public liberty, and in 
a democratic state is even a part of the sovereignty. To sell 
one's freedom d is so repugnant to all reason as can scarcely 
be supposed in any man. If liberty may be rated with respect 
to the buyer, it is beyond all price to the seller. The civil law, 
which authorizes a division of goods among men, cannot be 
thought to rank among such goods a part of the men who were 
to make this division. The same law annuls all iniquitous con- 
tracts ; surely then it affords redress in a contract where the 
grievance is most enormous. 

b Justinian's " Institutes," book I. rf I mean slavery in a strict sense, as 

c Excepting a few cannibals. formerly among the Romans, and at 

present in our colonies. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 237 

The third way is birth, which falls with the two former ; for 
if a man could not sell himself, much less could he sell an un- 
born infant. If a prisoner of war is not to be reduced to slavery, 
much less are his children. 

The lawfulness of putting a malefactor to death arises from 
this circumstance : the law by which he is punished was made 
for his security. A murderer, for instance, has enjoyed the 
benefit of the very law which condemns him ; it has been a con- 
tmual protection to him ; he cannot, therefore, object to it. 
But it is not so with the slave. The law of slavery can never 
be beneficial to him ; it is in all cases against him, without ever 
being for his advantage ; and therefore this law is contrary to 
the fundamental principle of all societies. 

If it be pretended that it has been beneficial to him, as his 
master has provided for his subsistence, slavery, at this rate, 
should be limited to those who are incapable of earning their 
livilihood. But who will take up with such slaves? As to 
infants, nature, wdio has supplied their mothers with milk, had 
provided for their sustenance ; and the remainder of their child- 
hood approaches so near the age in which they are most capa- 
ble of being of service that he who supports them cannot be 
said to give them an equivalent which can entitle him to be 
their master. 

Nor is slavery less opposed to the civil law than to that of 
nature. What civil law can restrain a slave from running away, 
since he is not a member of society, and consequently has no 
interest in any civil institutions? He can be retained only by 
a family law, that is, by the master's authority. 

3. — Another Origin of the Right of Slmrry 

I would as soon say that the right of slavery proceeds from 
the contempt of one nation for another, founded on a differ- 
ence in customs. 

Lopez de Gama c relates " that the Spaniards found near St. 
Martlia several basketfuls of crabs, snails, grasshoppers, and 
locusts, which proved to be the ordinary provision of the na- 
tives. This the conquerors turned to a heavy charge against 
the conquered." The author owns that this, with their smok- 

«"Biblioth. Ang." torn. .\iii. part II. art. 3. 



238 MONTESQUIEU 

ing and trimming their beards in a different manner, gave rise 
to the law by which the Americans became slaves to the 
Spaniards. 

Knowledge humanizes mankind, and reason inclines to 
mildness ; but prejudices eradicate every tender disposition. 

4. — Another Origin of the Right of Slavery 

I would as soon say that religion gives its professors a right 
to enslave those who dissent from it, in order to render its 
propagation more easy. 

This was the notion that encouraged the ravagers of America 
in their iniquity./" Under the influence of this idea they, 
founded their right of enslaving so many nations ; for these 
robbers, who would absolutely be both robbers and Christians, 
were superlatively devout. 

Louis XIII g was extremely uneasy at a law by which all 
the negroes of his colonies were to be made slaves ; but it be- 
ing strongly urged to him as the readiest means for their con- 
version, he acquiesced without further scruple. 

5. — Of the Slavery of the Negroes 

Were I to vindicate our right to make slaves of the negroes, 
these should be my arguments : — 

The Europeans, having extirpated the Americans, were 
obliged to make slaves of the Africans, for clearing such vast 
tracts of land. 

Sugar would be too dear if the plants which produce it were 
cultivated by any other than slaves. 

These creatures are all over black, and with such a flat nose 
that they can scarcely be pitied. 

It is hardly to be believed that God, who is a wise Being, 
should place a soul, especially a good soul, in such a black 
ugly body. 

It is so natural to look upon color as the criterion of human 
nature, that the Asiatics, among whom eunuchs are employed, 
always deprive the blacks of their resemblance to us by a more 
opprobrious distinction. 

/ See " History of the Conquest of g Labat's " New Voyage to the Isles 

Mexico," by Solis, and that of " Peru," of America," vol. iv. p. 114, in 1752, 
by Garcilasso de la Vega. i2mo. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 239 

The color of the skin may be determined by that of the hair, 
which, among the Egyptians, the best philosophers in the 
world, was of such importance that they put to death all the 
red-haired men who fell into their hands. 

The negroes prefer a glass necklace to that gold which 
polite nations so highly value. Can there be a greater proof of 
their wanting common sense ? 

It is impossible for us to suppose these creatures to be men, 
because, allowing them to be men, a suspicion would follow 
that we ourselves are not Christians./^ 

Weak minds exaggerate too much the wrong done to the 
Africans. For were the case as they state it, would the Euro- 
pean powers, who make so many needless conventions among 
themselves, have failed to enter into a general one, in behalf 
of humanity and compassion ? 

6. — The true Origin of the Right of Slavery 

It is time to inquire into the true origin of the right of slavery. 
It ought to be founded on the nature of things ; let us see if 
there be any cases where it can be derived thence. 

In all despotic governments people make no difficulty in 
selling themselves ; the political slavery in some measure anni- 
hilates the civil liberty. 

According to Mr. Perry ,j the Muscovites sell themselves very 
readily: their reason for it is evident — their liberty is not 
worth keeping. 

At Achim every one is for selling himself. Some of the chief 
lords 0, have not less than a thousand slaves, all principal mer- 
chants, who have a great number of slaves themselves, and 
these also are not without their slaves. Their masters are their 
heirs, and put them into trade. In those states, the freemen 
being overpowered by the government, have no better re- 
source than that of making themselves slaves to the tyrants in 
office. 

This is the true and rational origin of that mild law of slavery 
which obtains in some countries : and mild it ought to be, as 
founded on the free choice a man makes of a master, for his 

h The above arguments form a strik- i " Present State of Russia." 

ing instance of the prejudice under a Dampier's " Voyages," vol. iii. 

wliich even a liberal mind can labor. — 
Ed. 



240 MONTESQUIEU 

own benefit ; which forms a mutual convention between the 
two parties. 

7. — Another Origin of the Right of Slavery 

There is another origin of the right of slavery, and even of 
the most cruel slavery which is to be seen among men. 

There are countries where the excess of heat enervates the 
body, and renders men so slothful and dispirited that nothing 
but the fear of chastisement can oblige them to perform any 
laborious duty : slavery is there more reconcilable to reason ; 
and the master being as lazy with respect to his sovereign as 
his slave is with regard to him, this adds a political to a civil 
slavery. 

Aristotle b endeavors to prove that there are natural slaves ; 
but what he says is far from proving it. If there be any such, 
I believe they are those of whom I have been speaking. 

But as all men are born equal, slavery must be accounted 
unnatural, though in some countries it be founded on natural 
reason ; and a wide difference ought to be made between such 
countries, and those in which even natural reason rejects it, as 
in Europe, where it has been so happily abolished. 

Plutarch, in the " Life of Numa," says that in Saturn's time 
there was neither slave nor master. Christianity has restored 
that age in our climates. 

8. — Inutility of Slavery among its 

Natural slavery, then, is to be limited to some particular 
parts of the world. In all other countries, even the most serv- 
ile drudgeries may be performed by freemen. 

Experience verifies my assertion. Before Christianity had 
abolished civil slavery in Europe, working in the mines was 
judged too toilsome for any but slaves or malefactors : at pres- 
ent there are men employed in them who are known to live 
comfortably.^ The magistrates have, by some small privileges, 
encouraged this profession : to an increase of labor they have 
joined an increase of gain ; and have gone so far as to make 
those people better pleased with their condition than with any 
other which they could have embraced. 

b " Polit." lib. I. cap. i. Hartz, in Lower Saxony, and in those 

c As may be seen in the mines of of Hungary. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 241 

No labor is so heavy but it may be brought to a level with 
the workman's strength, when regulated by equity, and not by 
avarice. The violent fatigues which slaves are made to under- 
go in other parts may be supplied by a skilful use of ingenious 
machines. The Turkish mines in the Bannat of Temeswaer, 
though richer than those of Hungary, did not yield so much ; 
because the working of them depended entirely on the strength 
of their slaves. 

I know not whether this article be dictated by my under- 
standing or by my heart. Possibly there is not that climate 
upon earth where the most laborious services might not with 
proper encouragement be performed by freemen. Bad laws 
having made lazy men, they have been reduced to slavery be- 
cause of their laziness. 

9. — Several Kinds of Slavery 

Slavery is of two kinds, real and personal. The real annexes 
the slave to the land, which Tacitus makes d the condition of 
slaves among the Germans. They were not employed in the 
family : a stated tribute of corn, cattle, or other movables, paid 
to their master, was the whole of their servitude. And such 
a servitude still continues in Hungary, Bohemia, and several 
parts of Lower Germany. 

Personal slavery consists in domestic services, and relates 
more to the master's person. 

The worst degree of slavery is when it is at once both real 
and personal, as that of the Helotes among the Lacedaemonians. 
They underwent the fatigues of the field, and suffered all man- 
ner of insults at home. This helotism is contrary to the nature 
of things. Real slavery is to be found only among nations re- 
markable for their simplicity of life : c all family business being 
done by the wives and children. Personal slavery is peculiar 
to voluptuous nations ; luxury requiring the service of slaves 
in the house. But helotism joins in the same person the slavery 
established by voluptuous nations and that of the most simple. 

d " De Moribus Germanorum." tinRuishcd from the slave by any deli- 

f Tacitus, " De Moribus Germano- cacy of living, 
rum," says the master is not to be dis- 

VOL. I.— 16 



242 MONTESQUIEU 

lo. — Regulations necessary in respect to Slavery 

But of whatsoever kind the slavery be, the civil laws should 
endeavor on the one hand to aboHsh the abuses of it, and on 
the other to guard against its dangers. 

II. — Abuses of Slavery 

In Mahommedan states/ not only the life and goods of fe- 
male slaves, but also what is called their virtue or honor, are 
at their master's disposal. One of the misfortunes of those 
countries is that the greatest part of the nation are born only 
to be subservient to the pleasures of the other. This servitude 
is alleviated by the laziness in which such slaves spend their 
days ; which is an additional disadvantage to the state. 

It is this indolence which renders the eastern seraglios so 
delightful to those very persons whom they were made to con- 
fine.g People who dread nothing but labor may imagine them- 
selves happy in those places of indolence and ease. But this 
shows how contrary they are to the very intent of the institu- 
tion of slavery. 

Reason requires that the master's power should not extend 
to what does not appertain to his service : slavery should be 
calculated for utility, and not for pleasure. The laws of chas- 
tity arise from those of nature, and ought in all nations to be 
respected. 

If a law which preserves the chastity of slaves be good in 
those states where an arbitrary power bears down all before it, 
how much more will it be so in monarchies, and how much more 
still in republics? 

The law of the Lombards h has a regulation which ought to 
be adopted by all governments. " If a master debauches his 
slave's wife, the slave and his wife shall be restored to their 
freedom." An admirable expedient, which, without severity, 
lays a powerful restraint on the incontinence of masters ! 

The Romans seem to have erred on this head. They allowed 
an unlimited scope to the master's lusts, and, in some measure, 
denied their slaves the privilege of marrying. It is true, they 
were the lowest part of the nation ; yet there should have been 

f Sir John Chardin's " Travels to g Sir John Chardin, vol. ii., in his 

Persia." description of the market of Izagour. 

h Lib. I. tit. 32, sec. 5. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 243 

some care taken of their morals, especially as in prohibiting 
their marriage they corrupted the morals of the citizens. 

12. — Danger from the Multitude of Slaves 

The multitude of slaves has different effects in different gov- 
ernments. It is no grievance in a despotic state, where the po- 
litical servitude of the whole body takes away the sense of civil 
slavery. Those who are called freedmen in reality are little 
more so than they who do not come within that class ; and as 
the latter, in quality of eunuchs, freedmen, or slaves, have gen- 
erally the management of all affairs, the condition of a freedman 
and^that of a slave are very nearly allied. This makes it there- 
fore almost a matter of indifference whether in such states the 
slaves be few or numerous. 

But in moderate governments it is a point of the highest 
importance that there should not be a great number of slaves. 
The political liberty of those states adds to the value of civil 
liberty; and he who is deprived of the latter is also bereft of 
the former. He sees the happiness of a society, of which he is 
not so much as a member ; he sees the security of others fenced 
by laws, himself without any protection. He perceives that his 
master has a soul, capable of enlarging itself; while his own 
labors under a continual depression. Nothing more assimi- 
lates a man to a beast than living among freedmen, himself a 
slave. Such people as these are natural enemies of society; 
and their number must be dangerous. 

It is not therefore to be wondered at that moderate govern- 
ments have been so frequently disturbed by the revolts of 
slaves, and that this so seldom happens in despotic states.* 

13. — Of armed Slaves 

The danger of arming slaves is not so great in monarchies 
as in republics. In the former, a warlike people and a body 
of nobility are a sufficient check upon these armed slaves ; 
whereas the pacific members of a republic would have a hard 
task to quell a set of men who, having offensive weapons in 
their hands, would find themselves a match for the citizens. 

The Goths, who conquered Spain, spread themselves over 

t'The revolt of the Mamelukes was a different case; this was a body of the 
militia who usurped the empire. 



244 MONTESQUIEU 

the country, and soon became very weak. They made three 
important regulations : they aboHshed an ancient custom 
which prohibited intermarriages with the Romans;; they en- 
acted that all the freedmen /-; belonging to the Fiscus should 
serve in war, under penalty of being reduced to slavery; and 
they ordained that each Goth should arm and bring into the 
field the tenth part of his slaves.^ This was but a small pro- 
portion : besides, these slaves thus carried to the field did not 
form a separate body; they were in the army, and might be 
said to continue in the family. 

14. — The same Subject continued 

When a whole nation is of a martial temper, the slaves in 
arms are less to be feared. 

By a law of the Alemans, a slave who had committed a 
clandestine theft »" was liable to the same punishment as a 
freedman in the like case ; but if he was found guilty of an 
open robbery ,M he was only bound to restore the things so 
taken. Among the Alemans, courage and intrepidity extenu- 
ated the guilt of an action. They employed their slaves in their 
wars. Most republics have been attentive to dispirit their 
slaves ; but the Alemans, relying on themselves and being al- 
ways armed, were so far from fearing theirs that they were 
rather for augmenting their courage ; they were the instru- 
ments either of their depredations or of their glory. 

15. — Precautions to he used in Moderate Governments 

Lenity and humane treatment may prevent the dangers to be 
apprehended from the multitude of slaves in a moderate gov- 
ernment. Men grow reconciled to everything, and even to 
servitude, if not aggravated by the severity of the master. The 
Athenians treated their slaves with great lenity ; and this se- 
cured that state from the commotions raised by the slaves 
among the avistere Lacedaemonians. 

It does not appear that the primitive Romans met with any 
trouble from their slaves. Those civil broils which have been 

; " Law of the Visigoths," lib. III. m " Law of the Alemans," cap. v. 

tit. I, sec. I. sec. 3. 

k Ibid. lib. V. tit. 17, sec. 20. n Ibid. sec. 5, per virtutem. 

/ Ibid. IX. tit. 2, sec. 9. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 245 

compared to the Punic wars were the consequence of their 
having divested themselves of all humanity towards their 
slaves.o 

A frugal and laborious people generally treat their slaves 
more kindly than those who are above labor. The primitive 
Romans used to live, work, and eat with their slaves ; in short, 
they behaved towards them with justice and humanity. The 
greatest punishment they made them suffer was to make them 
pass before their neighbors with a forked piece of wood on their 
backs. Their manners were sufficient to secure the fidelity of 
their slaves ; so that there was no necessity for laws. 

But when the Romans aggrandized themselves ; when their 
slaves were no longer the companions of their labor, but the 
instruments of their luxury and pride ; as they then wanted 
morals, they had need of laws. It was even necessary for these 
laws to be of the most terrible kind, in order to establish the 
safety of those cruel masters who lived with their slaves as in 
the midst of enemies. 

They made the Sillanian scnatiis-consultum, and other 
laws,/' which decreed that when a master was murdered all the 
slaves under the same roof, or in any place so near the house 
as to be within the hearing of a man's voice, should, without 
distinction, be condemned to die. Those who in this case 
sheltered a slave, in order to save him, were punished as mur- 
derers ; 9 he whom his master r ordered to kill him, and who 
obeyed, was reputed guilty ; even he who did not hinder him 
from killing himself was liable to be punished.-? If a master was 
murdered on a journey, they put to death those who were with 
him and those who fled.^ All these laws took place even 
against persons whose innocence was proved ; the intent of 
them was to inspire their slaves with a prodigious respect for 
their master. They were not dependent on the civil govern- 
ment, but on a fault or imperfection of the civil government. 
They were not derived from the equity of civil laws, since they 
were contrary to the principle of those laws. They were prop- 

o " Sicily," says Florus, " suffered r Wlicn Antony commanded Eros to 
more in the Servile than in the Punic kill him, it was the same as command- 
war." — I^ib. IIT. inp him to kill himself; because, if he 

p See the whole title of the " Senat.- had obeyed, he would liave been pun- 
Cons, '^ill." in ff. ished as the murderer of his master. 

q Let, siquis, sec. 12 fT. " de Senat.- .? Leg. i, sec. 22 ff. " de Senat.-Cons. 

Cons. Sill.'' Sill." 

t Leg. I, sec. 31 ff. ibid. 



246 MONTESQUIEU 

erly founded on the principles of war, with this difference, that 
the enemies were in the bosom of the state. The Sillanian 
senatus-consiiltum was derived from the law of nations, which 
requires that a society, however imperfect, should be preserved. 
It is a misfortune in government when the magistrates thus 
find themselves under the necessity of making cruel laws ; " be- 
cause they have rendered obedience difhcult, they are obliged 
to increase the penalty of disobedience, or to suspect the slave's 
fidelity. A prudent legislator foresees the ill consequences of 
rendering the legislature terrible. The slaves amongst the 
Romans could have no confidence in the laws; and therefore 
the laws could have none in them. 

i6. — Regulations hetzveen Masters and Slaves 

The magistrate ought to take care that the slave has his food 
and raiment ; and this should be regulated by law. 

The laws ought to provide that care be taken of them in sick- 
ness and old age. Claudius « decreed that the slaves who in 
sickness had been abandoned by their masters should, in case 
they recovered, be emancipated. This law insured their lib- 
erty ; but should not there have been some care also taken to 
preserve their lives ? 

When the law permitted a master to take away the life of his 
slave, he was invested with a power which he ought to exercise 
as judge, and not as master ; it was necessary, therefore, that 
the law should ordain those formalities which remove the sus- 
picion of an act of violence. 

When fathers, at Rome, were no longer permitted to put 
their children to death, the magistrates ordained the punish- 
ment which the father would have inflicted.^' A like custom 
between the master and his slaves would be highly reasonable 
in a country where masters have the power of life and death. 

The law of Moses was extremely severe. " If a man struck 
his servant so that he died under his hand, he was to be pun- 
ished ; but, if he survived a day or two, no punishment ensued, 
because he was his money." w Strange that a civil institution 
should thus relax the law of nature ! 

By a law of the Greeks,^ a slave too severely treated by his 

« Xiphilin, in " Claudio." w Lev. xxi. 20. 

V See law 3, in the Code " de patria x Plutarcli on buperstition." 

potestate," by the Emperor Alexander. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 247 

master might insist upon being sold to another. In later times 
there was a law of the same nature at Rome.y A master dis- 
pleased with his slave, and a slave with his master, ought to be 
separated. 

When a citizen uses the slave of another ill, the latter ought 
to have the liberty of complaining before the judge. The laws 
of Plato,^; and of most nations, took away from slaves the right 
of natural defence. It was necessary then that they should 
give them a civil defence. 

At Sparta slaves could have no justice against either insults 
or injuries. So excessive was their misery, that they were not 
only the slaves of a citizen, but also of the public; they be- 
longed to all, as well as to one. At Rome, when they consid- 
ered the injury done to a slave, they had regard only to the in- 
terest of the master.o In the breach of the Aquilian law they 
confounded a wound given to a beast and that given to a slave ; 
they regarded only the diminution of their value. At Athens,&amp; 
he who had abused the slave of another was punished severely, 
and sometimes even with death. The law of Athens was very 
reasonable in not adding the loss of security to that of liberty. 

17. — Of Enfranchisements 

It is easy to perceive that many slaves in a republican gov- 
ernment create a necessity of making many free. The evil is, 
if they have too great a number of slaves they cannot keep 
them in due bounds ; if they have too many freedmen, they 
cannot live, and must become a burden to the republic: be- 
sides, it may be as much in danger from the multitude of freed- 
men as from that of slaves. It is necessary, therefore, that the 
law should have an eye to these two inconveniences. 

The several laws and decrees of the senate made at Rome, 
both for and against slaves, sometimes to limit, and at other 
times to facilitate, their enfranchisement, plainly show the em- 
barrassment in which they found themselves in this respect. 
There were even times in which they durst not make laws. 
When, under Nero,c they demanded of the senate permission 

y See the constitution of Antoninus of Germany, as may be seen by their 

Pius, " Institut." lib. I. tit. 7. codes. 

s ^Ah. IX. h Demosthenes, " Orat. contra Midi- 

a This was frequently the spirit of an," p- 610. Edition of Franlcfort, in 

the laws of those nations who came out 1604. 

&lt;r " Annals of Tacitus," lib, XIIJ. 



248 MONTESQUIEU 

for the masters to reduce again to slavery the ungrateful freed- 
men, the emperor declared that it was their duty to decide the 
affairs of individuals, and to make no general decree. 

Much less can I determine what ought to be the regulations 
of a good republic in such an afifair ; this depends on too many 
circumstances. Let us, however, make some reflections. 

A considerable number of freedmen ought not suddenly to 
be made by a general law. We know that among the Volsini- 
enses d the freedmen, becoming masters of the suffrages, en- 
acted an abominable law, which gave them the right of lying 
the first night with the young women married to the free-born. 

There are several ways of insensibly introducing new citizens 
into a republic. The laws may favor the acquiring a pcculmm, 
and put slaves into a condition of buying their liberty : they 
may prescribe a term to servitude, like those of Moses, which 
limited that of the Hebrew slaves to six years.^ It is easy to 
enfranchise every year a certain number of those slaves who, 
by their age, health, or industry, are capable of getting a sub- 
sistence. The evil may be even cured in its root, as a great 
number of slaves are connected with the several employments 
which are given them ; to divide amongst the free-born a part 
of these employments, for example, commerce or navigation, 
is diminishing the number of slaves. 

When there are many freedmen, it is necessary that the civil 
laws should determine what they owe to their patron, or that 
these duties should be fixed by the contract of enfranchise- 
ment. 

It is certain that their condition should be more favored in 
the civil than in the political state ; because, even in a popular 
government, the power ought not to fall into the hands of the 
vulgar. 

At Rome, where they had so many freedmen, the political 
laws with regard to them were admirable. They gave them 
very little, and excluded them almost from nothing : they had 
even a share in the legislature, but the resolutions they were 
capable of taking were almost of no weight. They might bear 
a part in the public offices, and even in the dignity of the priest- 
hood ; f but this privilege was in some sort rendered useless 

d Freinshemius's " Supplement," dec. e Exod. xxi. 

2, lib. V. / " Annals " of Tacitus, lib. III. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 249 

by the disadvantages they had to encounter in the elections. 
They had a right to enter into the army ; but they were to be 
registered in a certain class of the census before they could be 
soldiers. Nothing hindered the g freedmen from being united 
by marriage with the families of the free-born ; but they were 
not permitted to mix with those of the senator. In short, their 
children were free-born, though they were not so themselves. 

18. — Of Freedmen and Eunuchs 

Thus in a republican government it is frequently of advan- 
tage that the situation of the freedmen be but little below that 
of the free-born, and that the laws be calculated to remove a 
dislike of their condition. But in a despotic government, where 
luxury and arbitrary power prevail, they have nothing to do in 
this respect ; the freedmen generally finding themselves above 
the tree-born. They rule in the court of the prince, and in the 
palaces of the great ; and as they study the foibles and not the 
virtues of their master, they lead him entirely by the former, 
not by the latter. Such were the freedmen of Rome in the 
times of the emperors. 

When the principal slaves are eunuchs, let never so many 
privileges be granted them, they can hardly be regarded as 
freedmen. For as they are incapable of having a family of their 
own, they are naturally attached to that of another: and it is 
only by a kind of fiction that they are considered as citizens. 

And yet there are countries where the magistracy is entirely 
in their hands. " In Tonquin," h says Dampier,» " all the man- 
darins, civil and military, are eunuchs." They have no families, 
and though they are naturally avaricious, the master or the 
prince benefits in the end by this very passion. 

Dampier tells us, too, that in this country the eunuchs cannot 
live without women, and therefore marry. The law which per- 
mits their marriage may be founded partly on their respect for 
these eunuchs, and partly on their contempt of the fair sex. 

Thus they are trusted with the magistracy, because they have 
no family ; and permitted to marry, because they are magis- 
trates. 

g Augustus's speech in Dio, lib. L\'I. use the word eunuch whenever they 

h It was formerly the same in China. speak of a governor of the city. 

The two Mahommcdan Arabs who t Vol. iii. 

travelled thither in the ninth century 



250 MONTESQUIEU 

Then it is that the sense which remains would fain supply 
that which they have lost; and the enterprises of despair be- 
come a kind of enjoyment. So, in Milton, that spirit who has 
nothing left but desires, enraged at his degradation, would 
make use of his impotency itself. 

We see in the history of China a great number of laws to 
deprive eunuchs of all civil and military employments ; but 
they always returned to them again. It seems as if the eunuchs 
of the east were a necessary evil. 



BOOK XVI 

HOW THE LAWS OF DOMESTIC SLAVERY BEAR 
A RELATION TO THE NATURE OF THE CLI- 
MATE 

I. — Of domestic Servitude 

SLAVES are established for the family ; but they are not a 
part of it. Thus I distinguish their servitude from that 
which the women in some countries suffer, and which 
I shall properly call domestic servitude. 

2. — That in the Cojuitrics of the South there is a natural 
Inequality between the two Sexes 

Women, in hot climates, are marriageable at eight, nine, or 
ten years of age :a thus, in those countries, infancy and mar- 
riage generally go together. They are old at twenty: their 
reason, therefore, never accompanies their beauty. When 
beauty demands the empire, the want of reason forbids the 
claim ; when reason is obtained, beauty is no more. These 
women ought then to be in a state of dependence ; for reason 
cannot procure in old age that empire which even youth and 
beauty could not give. It is, therefore, extremely natural that 
in these places a man, when no law opposes it, should leave one 
wife to take another, and that polygamy should be introduced. 

In temperate climates, where the charms of women are best 
preserved, where they arrive later at maturity, and have chil- 
dren at a more advanced season of life, the old age of their 
husbands in some degree follows theirs ; and as they have more 
reason and knowledge at the time of marriage, if it be only on 
account of their having continued longer in life, it must natu- 

a "Mahomet married Cadhisja at five, of Mahomet." We see women in the 

and took her to his bed at eight years kingdom of Algiers pregnant at nine, 

old. In the hot countries of Arabia and ten, and eleven years of age. " Hist 

the Indies, girls are marriageable at of the Kingdom of Algiers," by Logicrs 

eight years of age, and are brought to dc Tassis, p. 6i. 
bed the year after."— Prideau.x, " Life 

251 



252 MONTESQUIEU 

rally introduce a kind of equality between the two sexes ; and, 
in consequence of this, the law of having only one wife. 

In cold countries the almost necessary custom of drinking 
strong liquors establishes intemperance amongst men. Wom- 
en, who in this respect have a natural restraint, because they 
are always on the defensive, have, therefore, the advantage of 
reason over them. 

Nature, which has distinguished men by their reason and 
bodily strength, has set no other bounds to their power than 
those of this strength and reason. It has given charms to 
women, and ordained that their ascendant over man shall end 
with these charms : but in hot countries, these are found only 
at the beginning, and never in the progress of life. 

Thus the law which permits only one wife is physically con- 
formable to the climate of Europe, and not to that of Asia. 
This is the reason why Mahommedanism was so easily estab- 
lished in Asia, and with such difficulty extended in Europe ; 
why Christianity is maintained in Europe, and has been de- 
stroyed in Asia ; and, in fine, why the Mahommedans have 
made such progress in China, and the Christians so little. Hu- 
man reasons, however, are subordinate to that Supreme Cause 
who does whatever He pleases, and renders everything sub- 
servient to His will. 

Some particular reasons induced Valentinian^ to permit 
polvgamy in the empire. That law, so improper for our cli- 
mates, was abrogated by Theodosius, Arcadius, and Honorius.c 



3. — That a Plurality of Wives greatly depends on the Means 

of supporting them 

Though in countries where polygamy is once established 
the number of wives is principally determined by the opulence 
of the husband, yet it cannot be said that opulence established 
polygamy in those states, since poverty may produce the same 
effect, as I shall prove when I come to speak of the savages. 

Polygamy, in powerful nations, is less a luxury in itself than 
the occasion of great luxury. In hot climates they have few 

h See Jornandes, " de Regno et Tern- c See Law 7 of the Code " de Judaeis 

por. Success.," and the ecclesiastic et Ccclicolis," and Nov. 18, cap. v. 
historians. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 253 

wants, and it costs little to maintain a wife and children ;d they 
may, therefore, have a great number of wives. 

4. — That the Law of Polygamy is an affair that depends on 

Calculation 

According to the calculations made in several parts of Eu- 
rope, there are here born more boys than girls ;€ on the con- 
trary, by the accounts we have of Asia, there are there born 
more girls than boys/ The law which in Europe allows only 
one wife, and that in Asia which permits many, have, there- 
fore, a certain relation to the climate. 

,In the cold climates of Asia there are born, as in Europe, 
more males than females ; and hence, say the Lamas,g is de- 
rived the reason of that law which amongst them permits a 
woman to have many husbands./j 

But it is difficult for me to believe that there are many coun- 
tries where the disproportion can be great enough for any ex- 
igency to justify the introducing either the law in favor of 
many wives or that of many husbands. This would only imply 
that a majority of women, or even a majority of men, is more 
conformable to nature in certain countries than in others. 

I confess that if what history tells us be true, that at Bantam 
there are ten women to one man,i this must be a case particu- 
larly favorable to polygamy. 

In all this I only give their reasons, but do not justify their 
customs. 

5. — The Reason of a Law of Malabar 

In the tribe of the Naires, on the coast of Malabar, the men 
can have only one wife, while a woman, on the contrary, may 
have many husbands./ The origin of this custom is not, I 
believe, difficult to discover. The Naires are the tribe of nobles, 

d In Ceylon a man may live on ten hommedan Arabs who, in the ninth con- 
sols a month; they eat nothing there but tury, went into India and China, 
rice and fish. " Collection of Voyages thought this custom a prostitution, 
made to establish an India Company." And indeed nothing could be more 

e Dr. Arbuthnot finds that in Eng- contrary to the ideas of a Mahommedan. 

land the number of boys exceeds that _ i " Collection of Voyages for the estab- 

of girls; but people have been to blame lishment of an India Company," vol. i. 

to conclude that the case is the same i,^'"^ Francis Pirard, cap. xxvii. 

in all climates. "Edifying Letters," 3d and loth col- 

f See Kempfcr, who relates that upon lection, on the Malleami on the Coast 

numbering the people of Meaco there of Malabar. This is considered as an 

were found 182,072 males, and 223,573 abuse of the military profession, as a 

females. _ wom.nn, says Pirard, of the tribe of 

i? Du flalde's " Hist, of China," vol. iv. the I'r.imins never would marry many 

It Albuzeir-cl-hassen, one of the Ma- husbands. 



254 MONTESQUIEU 

who are the soldiers of all those nations. In Europe soldiers 
are forbidden to marry ; in Malabar, where the climate requires 
greater indulgence, they are satisfied with rendering marriage 
as little burdensome to them as possible : they give one wife 
amongst many men, which consequently diminishes the attach- 
ment to a family, and the cares of housekeeping, and leaves 
them in the free possession of a military spirit. 



6. — Of Polygamy considered in itself 

With regard to polygamy in general, independently of the 
circumstances which may render it tolerable, it is not of the 
least service to mankind, nor to either of the two sexes, 
whether it be that which abuses or that which is abused. 
Neither is it of service to the children ; for one of its greatest 
inconveniences is, that the father and mother cannot have the 
same afifection for their offspring ; a father cannot love twenty 
children with the same tenderness as a mother can love two. 
It is much worse when a wife has many husbands ; for then 
paternal love only is held by this opinion, that a father may 
believe, if he will, or that others may believe, that certain 
children belong to him. 

They say that the Emperor of Morocco has women of all 
colors, white, black, and tawny, in his seraglio. But the wretch 
has scarcely need of a single color. 

Besides, the possession of so many wives does not always 
prevent their entertaining desires for those of others ;^ it is 
with lust as with avarice, whose thirst increases by the acquisi- 
tion of treasure. 

In the reign of Justinian, many philosophers, displeased with 
the constraint of Christianity, retired into Persia. What struck 
them the most, says Agathias,^ was that polygamy was per- 
mitted amongst men who did not even abstain from adultery. 

May I not say that a plurality of wives leads to that passion 
which nature disallows? for one depravation always draws on 
another. I remember that in the revolution which happened 
at Constantinople, when Sultan Achmet was deposed, history 
says that the people, having plundered the Kiaya's house, found 

k This is the reason why women in / " Life and Actions of Justinian," p. 

the East are so carefully concealed. 403. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 255 

not a single woman ; they tell us that at Algiers,wi in the great- 
est part of their seraglios, they have none at all. 

7. — Of an Equality of Treatment in case of many Wives 

From the law which permitted a plurality of wives followed 
that of an equal behavior to each. Mahomet, who allowed of 
four, would have everything, as provisions, dress, and con- 
jugal duty, equally divided between them. This law is also in 
force in the Maldivian isles," where they are at liberty to marry 
three wives. 

The law of Moseso even declares that if any one has married 
hLs son to a slave, and this son should afterwards espouse a free 
woman, her food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage shall 
he not diminish. They might give more to the new wife, but 
the first was not to have less than she had before. 

8. — Of the Separation of Women from Men 

The prodigious number of wives possessed by those who live 
in rich and voluptuous countries is a consequence of the law 
of polygamy. Their separation from men, and their close con- 
finement, naturally follow from the greatness of this number. 
Domestic order renders this necessary ; thus an insolvent debt- 
or seeks to conceal himself from the pursuit of his creditors. 
There are climates where the impulses of nature have such 
force that morality has almost none. If a man be left with a 
woman, the temptation and the fall will be the same thing ; the 
attack certain, the resistance none. In these countries, instead 
of precepts, they have recourse to bolts and bars. 

One of the Chinese classic authors considers the man as a 
prodigy of virtue who, finding a woman alone in a distant 
apartment, can forbear making use of force./' 

9. — Of the Connection between domestic and political 

Government 

In a republic the condition of citizens is moderate, equal, 
mild, and agreeable; everything partakes of the benefit of pub- 

m *' History of Algiers," by Logicr de woman in a lonely apartment; or to 

Tassis. bear the cries of an enemy, who must 

n Sec Pirard, cap. xii. perish without our assistance." Trans- 

o Exod. xxi. ID, 1 1. latinn of a Chinese piece of morality, 

p " Tt is an admirable touch-stone, to which may be seen in Du Ilaldc, vol. 

find by oneself a treasure, and to know iii. p. 151. 

the right owner; or to ."^ee a beautiful 



256 MONTESQUIEU 

lie liberty. An empire over the women cannot, amongst them, 
be so well exerted ; and where the climate demands this em- 
pire, it is most agreeable to a monarchical government. This 
is one of the reasons why it has ever been difficult to establish 
a popvilar government in the east. 

On the contrary, the slavery of women is perfectly conform- 
able to the genius of a despotic government, which delights in 
treating all with severity. Thus at all times have we seen in 
Asia domestic slavery and despotic government walk hand in 
hand with an equal pace. 

In a government which requires, above all things, that a par- 
ticular regard be paid to its tranquillity, and where the ex- 
treme subordination calls for peace, it is absolutely necessary 
to shut up the women ; for their intrigues would prove fata? 
to their husbands. A government which has not time to exam- 
ine into the conduct of its subjects views them with a suspicious 
eye, only because they appear and suffer themselves to be 
known. 

Let us only suppose that the levity of mind, the indiscretions, 
the tastes and caprices of our women, attended by their passions 
of a higher and a lower kind, with all their active fire, and in that 
full liberty with which they appear amongst us, were conveyed 
into an eastern government, where would be the father of a 
family who could enjoy a moment's repose? The men would 
be everywhere suspected, everywhere enemies ; the state 
would be overturned, and the kingdom overflowed with rivers 
of blood. 

10. — The Principle on zvhich the Morals of the East are 

founded 

In the case of a multiplicity of wives, the more a family ceases 
to be united, the more ought the laws to reunite its detached 
parts in a common centre ; and the greater the diversity of in- 
terests, the more necessary is it for the laws to bring them back 
to a common interest. 

This is more particularly done by confinement. The women 
should not only be separated from the men by the walls of the 
house, but they ought also to be separated in the same enclos- 
ure, in such a manner that each may have a distinct household 
in the same family. Hence each derives all that relates to the 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 257 

practice of morality, modesty, chastity, reserve, silence, peace, 
dependence, respect, and love ; and, in short, a general direc- 
tion of her thoughts to that which, in its own nature, is a thing 
of the greatest importance, a single and entire attachment to 
her family. 

Women have naturally so many duties to fulfil — duties which 
are peculiarly theirs, that they cannot be sufficiently excluded 
from everything capable of inspiring other ideas ; from every- 
thing that goes by the name of amusements ; and from every- 
thing which we call business. 

We find the manners more pure in the several parts of the 
East, in proportion as the confinement of women is more 
strictly observed. In great kingdoms there are necessarily 
great lords. The greater their wealth, the more enlarged is 
their ability of keeping their wives in an exact confinement, and 
of preventing them from entering again into society. Hence 
it proceeds that in the empires of Turkey, Persia, of the Mogul, 
China, and Japan, the manners of their wives are admirable. 

But the case is not the same in India, where a multitude of 
islands and the situation of the land have divided the country 
into an infinite number of petty states, which from causes that 
we have not here room to mention are rendered despotic. 

There are none there but wretches, some pillaging and others 
pillaged. Their grandees have very moderate fortunes, and 
those whom they call rich have only a bare subsistence. The 
confinement of their women cannot, therefore, be very strict ; 
nor can they make use of any great precautions to keep them 
within due bounds ; hence it proceeds that the corruption of 
their manners is scarcely to be conceived. 

We may there see to what an extreme the vices of a climate 
indulged in full liberty will carry licentiousness. It Is there 
that nature has a force, and modesty a weakness, which exceed 
all comprehension. At Patau? the wantor: desires of the wom- 
en are so outrageous, that the men are obliged to make use of 
a certain apparel to shelter them from their designs.** Accord- 

q " Collection of Voyages for the es- want of a husband. See Pirard, cap. 

tablishment of an India Company," vol. xii. At Bantam, as soon as a girl is 

ii. p. 2. twelve or thirteen years old, she must 

r In the Maldivian isles the fathers be married, if they would not have her 

marry their daughters at ten and eleven lend a debauched life. " Collection of 

years of age, because it is a great sin, Vovagcs for the establishment of an 

6ay they, to suffer them to endure the India Company," p. 348. 

Vol. I, — 17 



258 MONTESQUIEU 

ing to Mr. Smith,.y things are not better conducted in the petty 
kingdoms of Guinea. In these countries the two sexes lose 
even those laws which properly belong to each. 

II. — Of domestic Slavery independently of Polygamy 

It is not only a plurality of wives which in certain places 
of the East requires their confinement, but also the climate it- 
self. Those who consider the horrible crimes, the treachery, 
the dark villainies, the poisonings, the assassinations, which the 
liberty of women has occasioned at Goa and in the Portuguese 
settlements in the Indies, where religion permits only one wife ; 
and who compare them with the innocence and purity of man- 
ners of the women of Turkey, Persia, Hindostan, China, and 
Japan, will clearly see that it is frequently as necessary to sepa- 
rate them from the men, when they have but one, as when they 
have many. 

These are things which ought to be decided by the climate. 
What purpose would it answer to shut up women in our north- 
ern countries, where their manners are naturally good ; where 
all their passions are calm ; and where love rules over the heart 
with so regular and gentle an empire that the least degree of 
prudence is sufficient to conduct it? 

It is a happiness to live in those climates which permit such 
freedom of converse, where that sex which has most charms 
seems to embellish society, and where wives, reserving them- 
selves for the pleasures of one, contribute to the amusement of 
all. 

12. — Of natural Modesty 

All nations are equally agreed in fixing contempt and ig- 
nominy on the incontinence of women. Nature has dictated 
this to all. She has established the attack, and she has estab- 
lished too the resistance ; and having implanted desires in both, 
she has given to the one boldness, and to the other shame. To 
individuals she has granted a long succession of years to attend 
to their preservation : but to continue the species, she has 
granted only a moment. 

5 " Voyage to Guinea," part second. They steal into a man's bed, and wake 

"When the women happen to meet him; and if he refuses to comply with 

with a man, they lay hold of him, and their desires, they threaten to suffer 

threaten to make a complaint to their themselves to be caught in flagranti." 
husbands if he slight their addresses. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 259 

It is then far from being true that to be incontinent is to 
follow the laws of nature ; on the contrary, it is a violation of 
these laws, which can be observed only by behaving with 
modesty and discretion. 

Besides, it is natural for intelligent beings to feel their im- 
perfections. Nature has, therefore, fixed shame in our minds 
— a shame of our imperfections. 

When, therefore, the physical power of certain climates vio- 
lates the natural law of the two sexes, and that of intelligent 
beings, it belongs to the legislature to make civil laws, with a 
view to opposing the nature of the climate and re-establishing 
the primitive laws. 

13. — Of Jealousy 

With respect to nations, we ought to distinguish between the 
passion of jealousy and a jealousy arising from customs, man- 
ners, and laws. The one is a hot raging fever ; the other, cold, 
but sometimes terrible, may be joined with indifference and 
contempt. 

The one, an abuse of love, derives its source from love itself. 
The other depends only on manners, on the customs of a na- 
tion, on the laws of the country, and sometimes even on re- 
ligion.* 

It is generally the effect of the physical power of the climate ; 
and, at the same time, the remedy of this physical power. 

14. — Of the Eastern Manner of domestic Government 

Wives are changed so often in the East that they cannot have 
the power of domestic government. This care is, therefore, 
committed to the eunuchs, whom they intrust with their keys 
and the management of their families. " In Persia," says Sir 
John Chardin, " married women are furnished with clothes as 
they want them, after the manner of children." Thus that care 
which seems so well to become them, that care which every- 
where else is the first of their concern, does not at all regard 
them. 

I Mahompt desired his followers to when lie was dyinp, said the same thing; 
watch their wives; a certain Iman, and Confucius preached the same doc- 
trine. 



26o MONTESQUIEU 

15. — Of Divorce and Repudiation 

There is this difference between a divorce and a repudiation, 
that the former is made by mutual consent, arising from a 
mutual antipathy ; while the latter is formed by the will, and 
for the advantage of one of the two parties, independently of 
the will and advantage of the other. 

The necessity there is sometimes for women to repudiate, 
and the difficulty there always is in doing it, render that law 
very tyrannical which gives this right to men without granting 
it to women. A husband is the master of the house ; he has a 
thousand ways of confining his wife to her duty, or of bringing 
her back to it ; so that in his hands it seems as if repudiation 
could be only a fresh abuse of power. But a wife who repudi- 
ates only makes use of a dreadful kind of remedy. It is always 
a great misfortune for her to go in search of a second husband, 
when she has lost the most part of her attractions with another. 
One of the advantages attending the charms of youth in the 
female sex is that in an advanced age the husband is led to 
complacency and love by the remembrance of past pleasures. 

It is then a general rule that in all countries where the laws 
have given to men the power of repudiating, they ought also to 
grant it to women. Nay, in climates where women live in 
domestic slavery, one would think that the law ought to favor 
women with the right of repudiation, and husbands only with 
that of divorce. 

When wives are confined in a seraglio, the husband ought 
not to repudiate on account of an opposition of manners ; it is 
the husband's fault if their manners are incompatible. 

Repudiation on account of the barrenness of the woman 
ought never to take place except where there is only one wife :" 
when there are many, this is of no importance to the husband. 

A law of the Maldivians permitted them to take again a wife 
whom they had repudiated.'z^ A law of Mexico^ forbade their 
being reunited under pain of death. The law of Mexico was 
more rational than that of the Maldivians : at the time even of 
the dissolution, it attended to the perpetuity of marriage ; in- 

u It does not follow hence that re- any other, because in this «ase there 

pudiation on account of sterility should was less expense. Pirard's " Travels." 

be permitted amongst Christians. w '' Hist, of the Conquest of Mexico," 

V They took them again preferably to by Solis, p. 499. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 261 

stead of this, the law of the Maldivians seemed equally to sport 
with marriage and repudiation. 

The law of Mexico admitted only of divorce. This was a 
particular reason for their not permitting those who were vol- 
untarily separated to be ever reunited. Repudiation seems 
chiefly to proceed from a hastiness of temper, and from the 
dictates of passion ; while divorce appears to be an affair of 
deliberation. 

Divorces are frequently of great political use : but as to the 
civil utility, they are established only for the advantage of the 
husband and wife, and are not always favorable to their chil- 
dren. 

16. — Of Repudiation and Divorce amongst the Romans 

Romulus permitted a husband to repudiate his wife, if she 
had committed adultery, prepared poison, or procured false 
keys. He did not grant to women the right of repudiating their 
husbands. Plutarch-v calls this a law extremely severe. 

As the Athenian lawy gave the power of repudiation to the 
wife as well as to the husband, and as this right was obtained 
by the women amongst the primitive Romans, notwithstand- 
ing the law of Romulus, it is evident that this institution was 
one of those which the deputies of Rome brought from Athens, 
and which were inserted in the laws of the Twelve Tables. 

Cicero says that the reasons of repudiation sprang from the 
law of the Twelve Tables.^; We cannot then doubt but that 
this law increased the number of the reasons for repudiation 
established by Romulus. 

The power of divorce was also an appointment, or at least 
a consequence, of the law of the Twelve Tables. For from 
the moment that the wife or the husband had separately the 
right of repudiation, there was a much stronger reason for their 
having the power of quitting each other by mutual consent. 

The law did not require that they should lay open the causes 
of divorce.o In the nature of the thing, the reasons for repu- 
diation should be given, while those for a divorce are unneces- 
sary ; because, whatever causes the law may admit as suffi- 

X " T.ife of Romulus." ex fluodecitn tabulis causam addidit."— 

31 This was a law of Solon. I'hilip. ii. 

«" Mimam res suas sibi habere jussit, a Justinian altered this, Nov. 117, 

cap. X. 



262 MONTESQUIEU 

cient to break a marriage, a mutual antipathy must be stronger 
than them all. 

The following fact, mentioned by Dionysius Halicarnassus,&amp; 
Valerius Maximus,c and Aulus Gellius,^ does not appear to me 
to have the least degree of probability: though they had at 
Rome, say they, the power of repudiating a wife, yet they had 
so much respect for the auspices that nobody for the space of 
five hundred and twenty years ever made^ use of this right, till 
Carvilius Ruga repudiated his, because of her sterility. We 
need only be sensible of the nature of the human mind to per- 
ceive how very extraordinary it must be for a law to grant 
such right to a whole nation, and yet for nobody to make use 
of it. Coriolanus, setting out on his exile, advised hisf wife 
to marry a man more happy than himself. We have just been 
seeing that the law of the Twelve Tables and the manners of the 
Romans greatly extended the law of Romulus. But to what 
purpose were these extensions if they never made use of a 
power to repudiate? Besides, if the citizens had such a respect 
for the auspices that they would never repudiate, how came 
the legislators of Rome to have less than they ? And how came 
the laws incessantly to corrupt their manners? 

All that is surprising in the fact in question will soon dis- 
appear, only by comparing two passages in Plutarch. The 
regal lawg permitted a husband to repudiate in the three cases 
already mentioned, and " it enjoined," says Plutarch,/^ " that 
he who repudiated in any other case should be obliged to give 
the half of his substance to his wife, and that the other half 
should be consecrated to Ceres." They might then repudiate 
in all cases, if they were but willing to submit to the penalty. 
Nobody had done this before Carvilius Ruga,^ who, as Plutarch 
says in another place,; " put away his wife for her sterility two 
hundred and thirty years after Romulus." That is, she was re- 
pudiated seventy-one years before the law of the Twelve Tables, 
which extended both the power and causes of repudiation. 

b Lib. II. g Plutarch's " Life of Romulus." 

c Ibid., cao. iv. h Ibid. 

d Lib. IV. cap. iii. 8. i Indeed sterility is not a cause men- 

^ According to Dionys. Halicarn. and tioned by the law of Romulus: but to 

Valerius Maximus; and five hundred all appearance he was not subject to a 

and twenty-three, according to Aulus confiscation of his effects, since he fol- 

Gellius. Neither did they agree in lowed the orders of the censors, 

placing this under the same consuls. ; In his comparison between Theseus 

/ See the " Speech of Veturia " in and Romulus. 
Dionys. Halicarn. lib. VIII. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 263 

The authors I have cited say that Carvihus Ruga loved his 
wife, but that the censors made him take an oath to put her 
away, because of her barrenness, to the end that he might give 
children to the republic ; and that this rendered him odious 
to the people. We must know the genius and temper of the 
Romans before we can discover the true cause of the hatred 
they had conceived against Carvilius. He did not fall into dis- 
grace with the people for repudiating his wife ; this was an 
affair that did not at all concern them. But Carvilius had taken 
an oath to the censors, that by reason of the sterility of his 
wife he would repudiate her to give children to the republic. 
This was a yoke which the people saw the censors were going 
to put upon them. I shall discover, in the prosecution of this 
work,^ the repugnance which they always felt to regulations 
of the like kind. But whence can such a contradiction between 
those authors arise? It is because Plutarch examined into a 
fact, and the others have recounted a prodigy. 

k Book XXIII. chap. iii. 



BOOK XVII 

HOW THE LAWS OF POLITICAL SERVITUDE 
BEAR A RELATION TO THE NATURE OF THE 
CLIMATE 

I. — Of political Servitude 

POLITICAL servitude does not less depend on the nature 
of the cHmate than that which is civil and domestic; 
and this we shall now demonstrate. 

2. — The Difference between Nations in point of Courage 

We have already observed that great heat enervates the 
strength and courage of men, and that in cold climates they 
have a certain vigor of body and mind, which renders them 
patient and intrepid, and qualifies them for arduous enterprises. 
This remark holds good, not only between different nations, 
but even in the different parts of the same country. In the 
north of China a people are more courageous than those in the 
south ; and those in the south of Corea b have less bravery than 
those in the north. 

We ought not, then, to be astonished that the effeminacy of 
the people in hot climates has almost always rendered them 
slaves ; and that the bravery of those in cold climates has en- 
abled them to maintain their liberties. This is an effect which 
springs from a natural cause. 

This has also been found true in America ; the despotic 
empires of Mexico and Peru were near the Line, and almost 
all the little free nations were, and are still, near the Poles. 

3. — Of the Climate of Asia 

The relations of travellers c inform us " that the vast continent 
of the north of Asia, which extends from forty degrees or 

a Du Halde, vol. i. p. 112. c See " Travels to the North," vol. 

6 The Chinese books make mention viii.: the "Hist, of the Tartars"; and 
of this. Ibid. Du Halde, vol. iv. 

264 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 265 

thereabouts to the pole, and from the frontiers of Muscovy even 
to the eastern ocean, is in an extremely cold climate ; that this 
immense tract of land is divided by a chain of mountains which 
run from west to east, leaving Siberia on the north, and Great 
Tartary on the south ; that the climate of Siberia is so cold that, 
excepting a few places, it is unsusceptible of cultivation ; and 
that, though the Russians have settlements all along the Irtis, 
they cultivate nothing ; that this country produces only some 
little firs and shrubs ; that the natives of the country are di- 
vided into wretched hordes or tribes, like those of Canada ; 
that the reason of this cold proceeds, on the one hand, from the 
height of the land, and on the other from the mountains, which, 
in proportion as they run from south to north, are levelled in 
such a manner that the north wind everywhere blows with- 
out opposition ; that this wind, which renders Nova Zembla 
uninhabitable, blowing in Siberia makes it a barren waste ; 
that in Europe, on the contrary, the mountains of Norway and 
Lapland are admirable bulwarks, which cover the northern 
countries from the wind ; so that at Stockholm, which is about 
fifty-nine degrees latitude, the earth produces plants, fruits, 
and corn ; and that about Abo, which is sixty-one degrees, 
and even to sixty-three and sixty-four, there are mines of silver, 
and the land is fruitful enough." 

We see also in these relations " that Great Tartary, situatec* 
to the south of Siberia, is also exceedingly cold ; that the coun- 
try will not admit of cultivation ; that nothing can be found but 
pasturage for flocks and herds ; that trees will not grow there, 
but only brambles, as in Iceland ; that there are, near China 
and India, some countries where there grows a kind of millet, 
but that neither corn nor rice will ripen ; that there is scarcely 
a place in Chinese Tartary at forty-three, forty-four, and forty- 
five degrees where it does not freeze seven or eight months in 
the year, so that it is cold as Iceland, though it might be 
imagined, from its situation, to be as hot as the south of France ; 
that there are no cities, except four or five towards the eastern 
ocean, and some which the Chinese, for political reasons, have 
built near China ; that in the rest of Great Tartary there are 
only a few situated in Buchar, Turkestan, and Cathay ; that 
the reason of this extreme cold proceeds from the nature of the 
nitrous earth, full of saltpetre and sand, and more particularly 



266 MONTESQUIEU 

from the height of the land. Father Verbiest found that a cer- 
tain place, eighty leagues north of the great wall, towards the 
source of Kavamhuran, exceeded the height of the sea near 
Pekin three thousand geometrical paces ; that this height d is 
the cause that though almost all the great rivers of Asia have 
their source in this country, there is, however, so great a want 
of water that it can be inhabited only near the rivers and lakes." 

These facts being laid down, I reason thus : Asia has prop- 
erly no temperate zone, as the places situated in a very cold 
climate immediately touch upon those which are exceedingly 
hot, that is, Turkey, Persia, India, China, Corea, and Japan. 

In Europe, on the contrary, the temperate zone is very ex- 
tensive, though situated in climates widely different from each 
other ; there being no affinity between the climates of Spain 
and Italy and those of Norway and Sweden. But as the climate 
grows insensibly cold upon our advancing from south to north, 
nearly in proportion to the latitude of each country, it thence 
follows that each resembles the country joining it ; that there 
is no very extraordinary difference between them, and that, as 
I have just said, the temperate zone is very extensive. 

Hence it comes that in Asia the strong nations are opposed 
to the weak ; the warlike, brave, and active people touch imme- 
diately upon those who are indolent, effeminate, and timorous ; 
the one must, therefore, conquer, and the other be conquered. 
In Europe, on the contrary, strong nations are opposed to the 
strong; and those who join each other have nearly the same 
courage. This is the grand reason of the weakness of Asia, 
and of the strength of Europe ; of the liberty of Europe, and of 
the slavery of Asia : a cause that I do not recollect ever to have 
seen remarked. Hence it proceeds that liberty in Asia never 
increases ; whilst in Europe it is enlarged or diminished, ac- 
cording to particular circumstances. 

The Russian nobility have indeed been reduced to slavery 
by the ambition of one of their princes ; but they have always 
discovered those marks of impatience and discontent which 
are never to be seen in the southern climates. Have they not 
been able for a short time to establish an aristocratic govern- 
ment? Another of the northern kingdoms has lost its laws; 
but we may trust to the climate that they are not lost in such 
a manner as never to be recovered. 

d Tartary is, then, a kind of flat mountain. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 267 

4. — The Consequences resulting from this 

What we have now said is perfectly conformable to history. 
Asia has been subdued thirteen times ; eleven by the north- 
ern nations, and twice by those of the south. In the early ages 
it was conquered three times by the Scythians ; afterwards it 
was subdued once by the Medes, and once by the Persians ; 
again by the Greeks, the Arabs, the Moguls, the Turks, the 
Tartars, the Persians, and the Afghans. I mention only the 
Upper Asia, and say nothing of the invasions made in the rest 
of the south of that part of the world which has most frequently 
suffered prodigious revolutions. 

In Europe, on the contrary, since the establishment of the 
Greek and Phoenician colonies, we know but of four great 
changes ; the first caused by the conquest of the Romans ; the 
second by the inundation of barbarians, who destroyed those 
very Romans ; the third by the victories of Charlemagne ; and 
the last by the invasions of the Normans. And if this be rightly 
examined, we shall find, even in these changes, a general 
strength diffused through all the parts of Europe. We know 
the difficulty which the Romans met with in conquering Eu- 
rope, and the ease and facility with which they invaded Asia. 
We are sensible of the difficulties the northern nations had to 
encounter in overturning the Roman empire ; of the wars and 
labors of Charlemagne ; and of the several enterprises of the 
Normans. The destroyers were incessantly destroyed. 

5. — That when the People in the North of Asia and those of 
the North of Europe made Conquests, the Effects of the 
Conquest were not the same 

The nations in the north of Europe conquered as freemen ; 
the people in the north of Asia conquered as slaves, and sub- 
dued others only to gratify the ambition of a master. 

The reason is, that the people of Tartary, the natural con- 
querors of Asia, are themselves enslaved. They are inces- 
santly making conquests in the south of Asia, where they form 
empires : but that part of the nation which continues in the 
country finds that it is subject to a great master, who, being 
despotic in the South, will likewise be so in the North, and exer- 



268 MONTESQUIEU 

cising an arbitrary power over the vanquished subjects, pre- 
tends to the same over the conquerors. This is at present most 
conspicuous in that vast country called Chinese Tartary, which 
is governed by the emperor, with a power almost as despotic 
as that of China itself, and which he every day extends by his 
conquests. 

We may likewise see in the history of China that the em- 
perors e sent Chinese colonies into Tartary. These Chinese 
have become Tartars, and the mortal enemies of China ; but 
this does not prevent their carrying into Tartary the spirit of 
the Chinese government. 

A part of the Tartars who were conquerors have very often 
been themselves expelled ; when they have carried into their 
deserts that servile spirit which they had acquired in the climate 
of slavery. The history of China furnishes us with strong 
proofs of this assertion, as does also our ancient history./^ 

Hence it follows that the genius of the Getic or Tartarian na- 
tion has always resembled that of the empires of Asia. The 
people in these are governed by the cudgel ; the inhabitants of 
Tartary by whips. The spirit of Europe has ever been contrary 
to these manners ; and in all ages, what the people of Asia 
have called punishment those of Europe have deemed the most 
outrageous abuse.g 

The Tartars who destroyed the Grecian Empire established 
in the conquered countries slavery and despotic power: the 
Goths, after subduing the Roman Empire, founded monarchy 
and liberty. 

I do not know whether the famous Rudbeck, who in his 
" Atlantica " has bestowed such praises on Scandinavia, has 
made mention of that great prerogative which ought to set this 
people above all the nations upon earth ; namely, this country's 
having been the source of the liberties of Europe — that is, of 
almost all the freedom which at present subsists amongst man- 
kind. 

Jornadez the Goth called the north of Europe the forge of 
the human race.^ I should rather call it the forge where those 

e As Vouty V, Emperor of the fifth concerning the manner of thinking 

dynasty. _ among the German nations in respect 

/The Scythians thrice conquered to the cudgel; let the instrument be 

Asia, and thrice were driven thence. what it will, the power or action of 

Justin, lib. TI. beating was always considered by them 

g This is in no way contrary to what as an affront. 

I shall say in book XXVIII. chap. xx. h " Humani generis olficinam." 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 269 

weapons were framed which broke the chains of southern na- 
tions. In the North were formed those vahant people who 
salHed forth and deserted their countries to destroy tyrants 
and slaves, and to teach men that, nature having made them 
equal, reason could not render them dependent, except where 
it was necessary to their happiness. 

6. — A nciv physical Cause of the Slavery of Asia, and of the 

Liberty of Europe 

In Asia they have always had great empires ; in Europe 
these could never subsist. Asia has larger plains ; it is cut 
out Into much more extensive divisions by mountains and 
seas ; and as it lies more to the south, its springs are more easily 
dried up ; the mountains are less covered with snow ; and the 
rivers being not so large form more contracted barriers. i 

Power in Asia ought, then, to be always despotic: for if 
their slavery was not severe they would make a division incon- 
sistent with the nature of the country. 

In Europe the natural division forms many nations of a 
moderate extent, in which the ruling by laws is not incom- 
patible with the maintenance of the state : on the contrary, it 
is so favorable to it, that without this the state would fall into 
decay, and become a prey to its neighbors. 

It is this which has formed a genius for liberty that ren- 
ders every pax't extremely difficult to be subdued and subjected 
to a foreign power, otherwise than by the laws and the advan- 
tage of commerce. 

On the contrary, there reigns in Asia a servile spirit, which 
they have never been able to shake ofT, and it is impossible to 
find in all the histories of that country a single passage which 
discovers a freedom of spirit; we shall never see anything 
there but the excess of slavery. 

7. — Of Africa and America 

This is what I had to say of Asia and Europe. Africa is in 
a climate like that of the south of Asia, and is in the same servi- 
tude. America,/ being lately destroyed and re-peopled by the 

i The waters lose themselves or evap- America are called by the Spaniards 

r^rate before or after their streams are " Indios Tiravos," and are much more 

united. _ difficult to subdue than the great em- 

;' The petty barbarous nations of pires of Mexico and Peru. 



270 MONTESQUIEU 

nations of Europe and Africa, can now scarcely display its 
genuine spirit ; but what we know of its ancient history is very 
conformable to our principles. 

8. — Of the Capital of the Empire 



One of the consequences of what we have been mentioning i 

is, that it is of the utmost importance to a great prince to make \ 

a proper choice of the seat of his empire. He who places it to i 

the southward will be in danger of losing the north ; but he * 
who fixes it on the north may easily preserve the south. I do 

not speak of particular cases. In mechanics there are frictions j 

by which the effects of the theory are frequently changed or ! 

retarded ; and policy has also its frictions. \ 



BOOK XVIII 

OF LAWS IN THE RELATION THEY BEAR TO 
THE NATURE OF THE SOIL 

I. — How the Nature of the Soil has an Influence on the Laws 

THE goodness of the land, in any country, naturally es- 
tablishes subjection and dependence. The husband- 
men, who compose the principal part of the people, 
are not very jealous of their liberty ; they are too busy and too 
intent on their own private affairs. A country which over- 
flows with wealth is afraid of pillage, afraid of an army. " Who 
is there that forms this goodly party?" said Cicero to Atti- 
cus ; a " are they the men of commerce and husbandry ? Let us 
not imagine that these are averse to monarchy — these to whom 
all governments are equal, as soon as they bestow tranquillity." 

Thus monarchy is more frequently found in fruitful coun- 
tries, and a republican government in those which are not so ; 
and this is sometimes a sufficient compensation for the incon- 
veniences they suffer by the sterility of the land. 

The barrenness of the Attic soil established there a democ- 
racy ; and the fertility of that of Lacedaemonia an aristocratic 
constitution. For in those times Greece was averse to the 
government of a single person, and aristocracy bore the near- 
est resemblance to uhat government. 

Plutarch says b that the Cilonian sedition having been ap- 
peased at Athens, the city fell into its ancient dissensions, and 
was divided into as many parties as there were kinds of land in 
Attica. The men who inhabited the eminences would, by all 
means, have a popular government ; those of the flat, open 
country demanded a government composed of the chiefs ; and 
they who were near the sea desired a mixture of both. 

o Lib. XVII. ft " Life of Solon." 

271 



C72 MONTESQUIEU 

2. — The same Subject continued 

These fertile provinces are always of a level surface, where 
the inhabitants are unable to dispute against a stronger power ; 
they are then obliged to submit ; and when they have once sub- 
mitted, the spirit of liberty cannot return ; the wealth of the 
country is a pledge of their fidelity. But in mountainous dis- 
tricts, as they have but little, they may preserve what they have. 
The liberty they enjoy, or, in other words, the government 
they are under, is the only blessing worthy of their defence. 
It reigns, therefore, more in mountainous and rugged countries 
than in those which nature seems to have most favored. 

The mountaineers preserve a more moderate government, 
because they are not so liable to be conquered. They defend 
themselves easily, and are attacked with difficulty ; ammuni- 
tion and provisions are collected and carried against them with 
great expense, for the country furnishes none. It is, then, a 
more arduous, a more dangerous, enterprise to make war 
against them ; and all the laws that can be enacted for the safety 
of the people are there of least use. 

3. — What Countries are best cultivated 

Countries are not cultivated in proportion to their fertility, 
but to their liberty ; and if we make an imaginary division of 
the earth, we shall be astonished to see in most ages deserts 
in the most fruitful parts, and great nations in those where 
nature sems to refuse everything. 

It is natural for a people to leave a bad soil to seek a better, 
and not to leave a good soil to go in search of worse. Most 
invasions have, therefore, been made in countries which nature 
seems to have formed for happiness, and as nothing is more 
nearly allied than desolation and invasion, the best provinces 
are most frequently depopulated, while the frightful countries 
of the North continue always inhabited, from their being al- 
most uninhabitable. 

We find by what historians tell us of the passage of the peo- 
ple of Scandinavia along the banks of the Danube that this 
was not a conquest, but only a migration into desert countries. 

These happy climates must, therefore, have been depopu- 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 273 

lated by other migrations, though we know not the tragic 
scenes that happened. 

" It appears by many monuments of antiquity," says Aris- 
totle,c " that the Sardinians were a Grecian colony. They were 
formerly very rich ; and Aristeus, so famed for his love of ag- 
riculture, was their law-giver. But they have since fallen to 
decay ; for the Carthaginians, becoming their masters, de- 
stroyed everything proper for the nourishment of man, and 
forbade the cultivation of the lands on pain of death." Sar- 
dinia was not recovered in the time of Aristotle, nor is it to this 
day. 

The most temperate parts of Persia, Turkey, Muscovy, and 
Pola'nd have not been able to recover perfectly from the dev- 
astations of the Tartars. 

4. — Neiv Effects of the Fertility and Barrenness of Countries 

The barrenness of the earth renders men industrious, sober, 
inured to hardship, courageous, and fit for war ; they are 
obliged to procure by labor what the earth refuses to bestow 
spontaneously. The fertility of a country gives ease, effemi- 
nacy, and a certain fondness for the preservation of life. It has 
been remarked that the German troops raised in those places 
where the peasants are rich, as, for instance, in Saxony, are not 
so good as the others. Military laws may provide against this 
inconvenience by a more severe discipline. 

5. — Of the Inhabitants of Islands 

The inhabitants of islands have a higher relish for liberty 
than those of the continent. Islands are commonly of small 
extent ; d one part of the people cannot be so easily employed 
to oppress the other ; the sea separates them from great em- 
pires ; tyranny cannot so well support itself within a small com- 
pass: conquerors are stopped by the sea; and the islanders, 
being without the reach of their arms, more easily preserve 
their own laws. 

6. — Of Countries raised by the Industry of Man 

Those countries which the industr}- of man has rendered 
habitable, and which stand in need of the same industry to 

f Or he who wrote the book " De ff Japan is an exception to this, by its 

Mirabilibus." great extent as well as by its slavery. 

Vol. I.— 18 



2 74 MONTESQUIEU 

provide for their subsistence, require a mild and moderate gov- 
ernment. There are principally three of this species : the two 
fine provinces of Kiang-nan and Tsekiang in China, Egypt, 
and Holland. 

The ancient emperors of China were not conquerors. The 
first thing they did to aggrandize themselves was what gave the 
highest proof of their wisdom. They raised from beneath the 
waters two of the finest provinces of the empire ; these owe 
their existence to the labor of man. And it is the inexpressible 
fertility of these two provinces which has given Europe such 
ideas of the felicity of that vast country. But a continual and 
necessary care to preserve from destruction so considerable a 
part of the empire demanded rather the manners of a wise than 
of a voluptuous nation, rather the lawful authority of a mon- 
arch than the tyrannic sway of a despotic prince. Power was, 
therefore, necessarily moderated in that country, as it was 
formerly in Egypt, and as it is now in Holland, which nature 
has made to attend to herself, and not to be abandoned to 
negligence or caprice. 

Thus, in spite of the climate of China, where they are natu- 
rally led to a servile obedience ; in spite of the apprehensions 
which follow too great an extent of empire, the first legislators 
of this country were obliged to make excellent laws, and the 
government was frequently obliged to follow them. 

7. — Of human Industry 

Mankind by their industry, and by the Influence of good 
laws, have rendered the earth more proper for their abode. 
We see rivers flow where there have been lakes and marshes : 
this is a benefit which nature has not bestowed ; but it is a bene- 
fit maintained and supplied by nature. When the Persians e 
were masters of Asia, they permitted those who conveyed a 
spring to any place which had not been watered before to en- 
joy the benefit for five generations ; and as a number of rivu- 
lets flowed from Mount Taurus, they spared no expense in 
directing the course of their streams. At this day, without 
knowing how they came thither, they are found in the fields and 
gardens. 

Thus, as destructive nations produce evils more durable than 

e Polybius, lib. X. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 275 

themselves, the actions of an industrious people are the source 
of blessings which last when they are no more. 

8. — The general Relation of Laws 

The laws have a very great relation to the manner in which 
the several nations procure their subsistence. There should be 
a code of laws of a much larger extent for a nation attached to 
trade and navigation than for people who are content with cul- 
tivating the earth. There should be a much greater for the lat- 
ter than for those who subsist by their flocks and herds. There 
must be a still greater for these than for such as live by hunting. 

9. — Of the Soil of America 

The cause of there being such a number of savage nations in 
America is the fertility of the earth, which spontaneously pro- 
duces many fruits capable of affording them nourishment. If 
the women cultivate a spot of land round their cottages, the 
maize grows up presently ; and hunting and fishing put the 
men in a state of complete abundance. Besides, black cattle, 
as cows, bufifaloes, etc., thrive there better than carnivorous 
beasts. The latter have always reigned in Africa. 

We should not, I believe, have all these advantages in Eu- 
rope if the land was left uncultivated ; it would scarcely pro- 
duce anything besides forests of oaks and other barren trees. 

10. — Of Population in the Relation it hears to the Manner of 

procuring Subsistence 

Let us see in what proportion countries are peopled where 
the inhabitants do not cultivate the earth. As the produce of 
uncultivated land is to that of land improved by culture, so the 
number of savages in one country is to that of husbandmen in 
another: and when the people who cultivate the land culti- 
vate also the arts, this is also in such proportions as would re- 
quire a minute detail. 

They can scarcely form a great nation. If they are herds- 
men and shepherds, they have need of an extensive country 
to furnish subsistence for a small number; if they live by 
hunting, their number must be still less, and in order to find 
the means of life they must constitute a very small nation. 

Their country commonly abounds with forests, which, as 



276 MONTESQUIEU 

the inhabitants have not the art of draining off the waters, are 
filled with bogs ; here each troop canton themselves, and form 
a petty nation. 

II. — Of savage and barbarous Nations 

There is this difference between savage and barbarous na- 
tions : the former are dispersed clans, which for some particu- 
lar reason cannot be joined in a body ; and the latter are com- 
monly small nations, capable of being united. The savages 
are generally hunters ; the barbarians are herdsmen and shep- 
herds. 

This appears plain in the north of Asia. The people of Si- 
beria cannot live in bodies, because they are unable to find 
subsistence ; the Tartars may live in bodies for some time, be- 
cause their herds and flocks may for a time be reassembled. All 
the clans may then be reunited, and this is effected when one 
chief has subdued many others ; after which they may do two 
things — either separate, or set out with a design to make a 
great conquest in some southern empire. 

12. — Of the Law of Nations amongst People zvho do not culti- 
vate the Earth 

As these people do not live in circumscribed territories, many 
causes of strife arise between them ; they quarrel about waste 
land as we about inheritances. Thus they find frequent occa- 
sions for war, in disputes in relation either to their hunting, 
their fishing, the pasture for their cattle, or the violent seizing 
of their slaves ; and as they are not possessed of landed prop- 
erty, they have many things to regulate by the law of nations, 
and but few to decide by the civil law. 

13. — Of the Civil Laws of those Nations zvho do not cultivate 

the Earth 

The division of lands is what principally increases the civil 
code. Amongst nations where they have not made this divi- 
sion there are very few civil laws. 

The institutions of these people may be called manners 
rather than laws. 

Amongst such nations as these the old men, who remember 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 277 

things past, have great authority; they cannot there be dis- 
tinguished by wealth, but by wisdom and valor. 

These people wander and disperse themselves in pasture 
grounds or in forests. Marriage cannot there have the securi- 
ty which it has amongst us, where it is fixed by the habitation, 
and where the wife continues in one house ; they may then 
more easily change their wives, possess many, and sometimes 
mix indifferently like brutes. 

Nations of herdsmen and shepherds cannot leave their cat- 
tle, which are their subsistence ; neither can they separate 
themselves from their wives, who look after them. All this 
ought, then, to go together, especially as, living generally in a 
flat open country, where there are few places of considerable 
strength, their wives, their children, their flocks, may become 
the prey of their enemies. 

The laws regulate the division of plunder, and give, like our 
Salic laws, a particular attention to theft. 

14. — Of the political State of the People zvho do not cultivate 

the Land 

These people enjoy great liberty ; for as they do not cul- 
tivate the earth, they are not fixed: they are wanderers and 
vagabonds ; and if a chief should deprive them of their liberty, 
they would immediately go and seek it under another, or re- 
tire into the woods, and there live with their families. The 
liberty of the man is so great among these people that it neces- 
sarily draws after it that of the citizen. 

15. — Of People zvho knozv the Use of Money 

Aristippus being cast away, swam and got safely to the next 
shore, where, beholding geometrical figures traced in the sand, 
he was seized with a transport of joy, judging that he was 
amongst Greeks, and not in a nation of barbarians. 

Should you ever happen to be cast by some adventure 
amongst an unknown people ; upon seeing a piece of money 
you may be assured that you have arrived in a civilized coun- 
try. 

The culture of lands rcc|uires the use of money. This culture 
supposes many inventions and many degrees of knowledge ; 



278 MONTESQUIEU 

and we always see ingenuity, the arts, and a sense of want mak- 
ing their progress with an equal pace. All this conduces to the 
establishment of a sign of value. 

Torrents and eruptions have led to the discovery that metals 
are contained in the bowels of the earth.o When once they 
have been separated, they have easily been applied to their 
proper use. 

16. — Of Civil Laws amongst People who knozv not the Use of 

Money 

When a people have not the use of money, they are seldom 
acquainted with any other injustice than that which arises from 
violence : and the weak, by uniting, defend themselves from 
its effects. They have nothing there but political regulations. 
But where money is established, they are subject to that injus- 
tice which proceeds from craft — an injustice that may be exer- 
cised in a thousand ways. Hence they are forced to have good 
civil laws, which spring up with the new practices of iniquity. 

In countries where they have no specie, the robber takes only 
bare movables, which have no mutual resemblance. But where 
they make use of money, the robber takes the signs, and these 
always resemble each other. In the former nothing can be 
concealed, because the robber takes along with him the proofs 
of his conviction ; but in the latter it is quite the contrary. 

17. — Of political Lazvs amongst Nations who have not the Use 

of Money 

The greatest security of the liberties of a people who do not 
cultivate the earth is their not knowing the use of money. 
What is gained by hunting, fishing, or keeping herds of cattle 
cannot be assembled in such great quantity, nor be sufficiently 
preserved, for one man to find himself in a condition to corrupt 
many others : but when, instead of this, a man has a sign of 
riches, he may obtain a large quantity of these signs, and dis- 
tribute them as he pleases. 

The people who have no money have but few wants ; and 
these are supplied with ease, and in an equal manner. Equal- 

o It is thus that Diodorus tells us the mountains. Aristotle concurs in this 
shepherds found gold in the Pyrenean idea, but Strabo treats it as a fable. — 

Ed. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 279 

ity is then unavoidable ; and hence it proceeds that their chiefs 
are not despotic. 

If what travellers tell us be true, the constitution of a nation 
of Louisiana, called the Natchez, is an exception to this. Their 
chief disposes of the goods of all his subjects, and obliges them 
to work and toil, according to his pleasure.^ He has a power 
like that of the grand seignior, and they cannot even refuse him 
their heads. When the presumptive heir enters the world, 
they devote all the sucking children to his service during his 
life. One would imagine that this is the great Sesostris. He is 
treated in his cottage with as much ceremony as an emperor of 
Japan or China. 

18. — Of the Power of Superstition 

The prejudices of superstition are superior to all others, and 
have the strongest influence on the human mind. Thus, 
though the savage nations have naturally no knowledge of 
despotic tyranny, still they feel the weight of it. They adore 
the sun ; and if their chief had not imagined that he was the 
brother of ,this glorious luminary, they would have thought 
him a wretch like themselves. 

19. — Of the Liberty of the Arabs and the Servitude of the 

Tartars 

The Arabs and Tartars are nations of herdsmen and shep- 
herds. The Arabs find themselves in that situation of which 
we have been speaking, and are, therefore, free ; whilst the Tar- 
tars (the most singular people on earth) are involved in a po- 
litical slavery.^ I have already given reasons for this,(^ and 
shall now assign some others. 

They have no towns, no forests, and but few marshes ; their 
rivers are generally frozen, and they dwell in a level country 
of an immense extent. They have pasture for their herds and 
flocks, and consequently property ; but they have no kind of 
retreat, or place of safety. A khan is no sooner overcome than 
they cut oflf his head ; his children are treated in the same 
manner,^ and all his subjects belong to the conqueror. These 

b " EflifyinR T.etters," 2otli collection. c We ouRht not therefore to be aston- 

f Wlien a klian is proclaimed, all the ishcd at Mahomet, the son of Miriveis, 

people cry that his word shall be as a who, upon taking Ispahan, put all the 

sword. princes of the blood to the sword. 
d Book XVII. chap. 5. 



28o MONTESQUIEU 

are not condemned to a civil slavery, for in that case they would 
be a burden to a simple people, who have no lands to cultivate, 
and no need of any domestic service. They, therefore, add to 
the bulk of the nation ; but, instead of civil servitude, a political 
slavery must naturally be introduced amongst them. 

It is apparent that in a country where the several clans make 
continual war, and are perpetually conquering each other ; 
in a country where, by the death of the chief, the body politic 
of the vanquished clan is always destroyed, the nation in gen- 
eral can enjoy but little freedom ; for there is not a single 
party that must not have been often subdued. 

A conquered people may preserve some degree of liberty 
when, by the strength of their situation, they are in a state that 
will admit of capitulating after their defeat. But the Tartars, 
always defenceless, being once overcome can never be able to 
obtain conditions. 

I have said, in chapter 2, that the inhabitants of cultivated 
plains are seldom free. Circumstances have occurred to put 
the Tartars, who dwell in uncultivated plains, in the same situ- 
ation. 

20. — Of the Lazv of Nations as practised by the Tartars 

The Tartars appear to be mild and humane amongst them- 
selves ; and yet they are most cruel conquerors : when they 
take cities they put the inhabitants to the sword, and imagine 
that they act humanely if they only sell the people, or dis- 
tribute them amongst their soldiers. 

They have destroyed Asia, from India even to the Mediter- 
ranean ; and all the country which forms the east of Persia 
they have rendered a desert. 

The law of nations is owing, I think, to the following cause. 
These people having no towns, all their wars are carried on 
with eagerness and impetuosity. They fight whenever they 
hope to conquer ; and when they have no such hope, they join 
the stronger army. With such customs, it is contrary to the 
law of nations that a city incapable of repelling their attack 
should stop their progress. They regard not cities as an asso- 
ciation of inhabitants, but as places made to bid defiance to 
their power. They besiege them without military skill, and ex- 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 281 

pose themselves greatly in the attack ; and, therefore, revenge 
themselves on all those who have spilled their blood. 

21. — The Civil Laiv of the Tartars 

Father Du Halde says that amongst the Tartars the young- 
est of the males is always the heir, by reason that as soon as the 
elder brothers are capable of leading a pastoral life they leave 
the house with a certain number of cattle, given them by their 
father, and build a new habitation. The last of the males, who 
continues at home with the father, is then his natural heir. 

T have heard that a like custom was also observed in some 
small districts of England ; and we find it still in Brittany, in 
the Duchy of Rohan, where it obtains with regard to ignoble 
tenures. This is doubtless a pastoral law conveyed thither by 
some of the people of Britain, or established by some German 
nation. By Caesar and Tacitus we are informed that the latter 
cultivated but little land. 

22. — Of a Civil Law of the German Nations 

I shall here explain how that particular passage of the Salic 
law which is commonly distinguished by the term " the Salic 
law " relates to the institutions of a people who do not cultivate 
the earth, or at least who cultivate it but very little. 

The Salic law ordains^ that when a man has left children be- 
hind him, the males shall succeed to the Salic land in prefer- 
ence to the females. 

To understand the nature of those Salic lands, there needs 
no more than to search into the usages or customs of the 
Franks with regard to lands before they left Germany. 

Mr. Echard has very plainly proved that the word Salic is 
derived from Sala, which signifies a house ; and, therefore, that 
the Salic land was the land belonging to the house. I shall 
proceed further, and examine into the nature of the house, and 
of the land belonging to the house, among the Germans. 

" They dwell not in towns," says Tacitus, " nor can they 
bear to have their habitations contiguous to those of others ; 
every one leaves a space or small piece of ground about his 

/Tit. 62. 



282 MONTESQUIEU 

house, which is inclosed. "g Tacitus is very exact in this ac- 
count, for many laws of the barbarian codes have different 
decrees against those who threw down this inclosure, as well 
as against such as broke into the house./f 

We learn from Tacitus and Csesar that the lands cultivated 
by the Germans were given them only for the space of a year, 
after which they again became public. They had no other 
patrimony but the house and a piece of land within the in- 
closure that surrounded it.^ It was this particular patrimony 
which belonged to the males. And, indeed, how could it be- 
long to the daughters ? They were to pass into another habi- 
tation. 

The Salic land was then within that inclosure which be- 
longed to a German house ; this was the only property they 
had. The Franks, after their conquests, acquired new posses- 
sions, and continued to call them Salic lands. 

When the Franks lived in Germany their wealth consisted 
of slaves, flocks, horses, arms, etc. The habitation and the 
small portion of land adjoining it were naturally given to the 
male children who were to dwell there. But afterwards when 
the Franks had by conquest acquired large tracts of land, they 
thought it hard that the daughters and their children should be 
incapable of enjoying any part of them. Hence it was that 
they introduced a custom of permitting the father to settle the 
estate after his death upon his daughter, and her children. 
They silenced the law ; and it appears that these settlements 
were frequent, since they were entered in the formularies.;' 

Amongst these formularies I find one of a singular nature. ^ 
A grandfather ordained by will that his grandchildren should 
share his inheritance with his sons and daughters. What then 
became of the Salic law ? In those times either it would not be 
observed, or the continual use of nominating the daughters to 
an inheritance had made them consider their ability to succeed 
as a case authorized by custom. 

g " Nullas Gcrmanorum populis urbes i This inclosure is called " Cortis " in 

habitari satis notum est, ne pati quidem the charters. 

inter se junctas sedes; colunt discreti, ; See Marculfus, lib. II. form. lo and 

ut nemus placuit. Vicos locant, non in 12. Append, to Marculf. form. 49, and 

nostrum morem connexis et cohaerenti- the ancient formularies of " Sirmon- 

bus a;dificiis: suam quisque domum dus," form. 22. 

spatio circumdat."— " De Moribus Ger- k Form. 55, in Lindembroch's collec- 

manorum." tion. 

h The " Law of the Alemans," chap. 
X., and the " Law of the Bavarians," 
tit. 10, sees. I and 2. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 283 

The Salic law had not in view a preference of one sex to the 
other, much less had it a regard to the perpetuity of a family, 
a name, or the transmission of land. These things did not 
enter into the heads of the Germans ; it was purely an econom- 
ical law, which made the house and the land dependent thereon 
to the males who should dwell in it, and to whom it conse- 
quently was of most service. 

We need here only transcribe the title of the allodial lands 
of the Salic law ; that famous text of which so many have 
talked, and which so few have read. 

" I. If a man dies without issue, his father or mother shall 
succeed him. 2. If he has neither father nor mother, his 
brother or sister shall succeed him. 3. If he has neither 
brother nor sister, the sister of his mother shall succeed him. 
4. If his mother has no sister, the sister of his father shall suc- 
ceed him. 5. If his father has no sister, the nearest relative 
by the male side shall succeed. 6. Not any part of the Salic 
land shall pass to the females ; but it shall belong to the males ; 
that is, the male children shall succeed their father." I 

It is plain that the first five articles relate to the inheritance 
of a man who dies without issue ; and the sixth to the succes- 
sion of him who has children. 

When a man dies without children, the law ordains that 
neither of the two sexes shall have the preference to the other, 
except in certain cases. In the first two degrees of succession, 
the advantages of the males and females were the same ; in the 
third and fourth, the females had the preference ; and the males 
in the fifth. 

Tacitus points out the source of these extravagances. " The 
sister's children," says he, " are as dear to their uncle as to their 
own father. There are men who regard this degree of kindred 
as more strict, and even more holy. They prefer it when they 
receive hostages."'" Hence it proceeds that our earliest his- 
torians speak in such strong terms of the love of the kings of 
the Franks for their sisters and their sisters' children." And, 

/ " De term vero Salica in mulicrem nexum sanguinis arbitrantiir, et in ac- 

nulla portio hereditatis transit, serl hoc cipiendis obsidibiis magis exigunt, tan- 

virilis sexus acquirit, hoc est filii in quam ii ct animum firmius et domuin 

ipsa hereditate succedunt."— Tit. 62, latins tcncant."— " De Moribus Gcr- 

sec. 6. manorum." 

m " Sororiim filiis idem apud avun- ii See, in " Gregory of Tours." lib. 

culum quam .".pud patrem honor. Qui- VITI. chap, xviii. and xx., and lib. XI. 

dam sanctiorcm arctioremquc liunc chap. xvi. anil xx., the rage of Gontrani 



284 MONTESQUIEU 

indeed, if the children of the sister were considered in her 
brother's house as his own children, it was natural for these to 
regard their aunt as their mother. 

The sister of the mother was preferred to the father's sister ; 
this is explained by other texts of the Salic law. When a 
woman became a widow,o she fell under the guardianship of 
her husband's relatives; the law preferred to this guardianship 
the relatives by the females before those by the males. Indeed, 
a woman who entered into a family joining herself with those of 
her own sex, became more united to her relatives by the female 
than by the male. Moreover, when a man killed another, and 
had not wherewithal to pay the pecuniary penalty, the law per- 
mitted him to deliver up his substance and his relatives were 
to supply the deficiency./' After the father, mother, and 
brother, the sister of the mother was to pay, as if this tie had 
something in it most tender : now the degree of kindred which 
imposes the burdens ought also to confer the advantages. 

The Salic law enjoins that after the father's sister, the suc- 
cession should be held by the nearest relative male ; but if this 
relative was beyond the fifth degree, he should not inherit. 
Thus a female of the fifth degree might inherit to the prejudice 
of a male of the sixth ; and this may be seen in the law of the 
Ripuarian Franks (a faithful interpreter of the Salic law), un- 
der the title of allodial lands, where it closely adheres to the 
Salic law on the same subject.^ 

If the father left issue, the Salic law would have the daughters 
excluded from the inheritance of the Salic land, and deter- 
mined that it should belong to the male children. 

It would be easy for me to prove that the Salic law did not 
absolutely exclude the daughters from the possession of the 
Salic land, but only in the case where they were debarred by 
their brothers, i. This appears from the letter of the Salic law ; 
which, after having said that the women shall possess none of 
the Salic land, but only the males, interprets and restrains itself 
by adding, " that is, the son shall succeed to the inheritance 
of the father." 

2. The text of the Salic law is cleared up by the law of the 

at Leovigild's ill treatment of Tngunda, p Ibid. tit. 61, sec. i. 

his niece, which Childebert, her brother, q " Et deinceps usque ad quintum 

took up arms to revenge. genuculum qui proximus fuerit in 

Sahc law, tit. 47. hereditatem succedat."— Tit. 56, sec. 3. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 285 

Ripiiarian Franks, which has also a title on allodial lands very 
conformable to that of the Salic law.?* 

3. The laws of these barbarous nations who all sprang from 
Germany interpret each other, more particularly as they all 
have nearly the same spirit. The Saxon law enjoined the father 
and mother to leave their inheritance to their son, and not to 
their daughter ; but if there were none but daughters, they 
were to have the whole inheritance.-^ 

4. We have two ancient formularies t that state the case in 
which, according to the Salic law, the daughters were excluded 
by the males ; that is, when they stood in competition with 
their brother. 

5. Another formulary « proves that the daughter succeeded, 
to the prejudice of the grandson ; she was, therefore, excluded 
only by the son. 

6. If daughters had been generally debarred by the Salic 
law from the inheritance of land, it would be impossible to ex- 
plain the histories, formularies, and charters which are continu- 
ally mentioning the lands and possessions of the females un- 
der the first race. 

People have been wrong in asserting that the Salic lands 
were fiefs.'^ i. This head is distinguished by the title of allodial 
lands. 2. Fiefs at first were not hereditary. 3. If the Salic 
lands had been fiefs, how could Marculfus treat that custom as 
impious which excluded the women from inheriting, when the 
males themselves did not succeed to fiefs? 4. The charters 
which have been cited to prove that the Salic lands were fiefs 
only show that they were freeholds. 5. Fiefs were not estab- 
lished till after the conquest, and the Salic customs existed 
long before the Franks left Germany. 6. It was not the Salic 
law that formed the establishment of fiefs, by setting bounds 
to the succession of females ; but it was the establishment of 
fiefs that prescribed limits to the succession of females, and to 
the regulations of the Salic law. 

After what has been said, one would not imagine that the per- 
petual succession of males to the crown of France should have 

r Tit. 56. t In Marculfus, lib. II. form. 12, and 

5 Ibid., 7, sec. i: " Pater aut mater de- in the Appendix to Marculfus, form. 49. 

functi, filio non filijc liereditatcm re- 1/ I.indembroch's collection, form. 55. 

linquant ' ; sec. 4, " qui defunctus, non v Ducange, Pithou, etc. 

filios, sed filias relinuerit, ad eas omnis 

hereditas pertineat. 



286 



MONTESQUIEU 



taken its rise from the Salic law. And yet this is a point in- 
dubitably certain. I prove it from the several codes of the 
barbarous nations. The Salic law,w and the law of the Bur- 
gundians,^ debarred the daughters from the right of succeed- 
ing to the land in conjunction with their brothers ; neither did 
they succeed to the crown. The law of the Visigothsjj on the 
contrary, permitted the daughters to inherit the land with the 
brothers : ^ and the women were capable of inheriting the 
crown.o Amongst these people the regulations of the civil law 
had an effect on the political. 

This was not the only case in which the political law of the 
Franks gave way to the civil. By the Salic law, all the brothers 
succeeded equally to the land, and this was also decreed by a 
law of the Burgundians. Thus, in the kingdom of the Franks, 
and in that of the Burgundians, all the brothers succeeded to 
the crown, if we except a few murders and usurpations which 
took place amongst the Burgundians. 

23. — Of the regal Ornaments among the Franks 

A people who do not cultivate the land have no idea of lux- 
ury. We may see, in Tacitus, the admirable simplicity of the 
German nations: they had no artificial elegances of dress; 
their ornaments were derived from nature. If the family of 
their chief was to be distinguished by any sign, it was no other 
than that which nature bestowed. The kings of the Franks, 
of the Burgundians, and the Visigoths wore their long hair 
for a diadem. 

24. — Of the Marriages of the Kings of the Franks 

I have already mentioned that with people who do not cul- 
tivate the earth, marriages are less fixed than with others, and 
that they generally take many wives. " Of all the barbarous na- 
tions the Germans were almost the only people who were sat- 



«;Tit. 62. 

X Tit. I, sec. 3 ; tit. 14, sec. i ; and tit. 
51- 

y Lib. IV. tit. 2, sec. i. 

3 Among the Ostrogoths, the crown 
twice devolved to the males by means 
of females; the first time to Athalaricus, 
through Amalasuntha, and the second 
to Theodat, through Amalafreda. Not 
but that the females of that nation 



might have held the crown in their own 
right; for Amalasuntha reigned after 
the death of Athalaricus; nay, even af- 
ter the election of Theodat, and in con- 
junction with that prince. See Ama- 
lasuntha's and Theodat's letters, in 
" Cassiodorus," lib. X. 

a The German nations, says Tacitus, 
had common customs, as well as those 
which were peculiar to each. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



287 



isfied with one wife,^ if we except," says Tacitus, " some persons 
who, not from a dissoluteness of manners, but because of their 
nobiHty, had many."c 

This explains the reason why the kings of the first race had 
so great a number of wives. These marriages were less a 
proof of incontinence than a consequence of dignity : and it 
would have wounded them in a tender point to have deprived 
them of such a prerogative. c? This also explains the reason 
why the example of the kings was not followed by the subjects. 



25. — Childeric 

*^The laws of matrimony amongst the Germans," says Taci- 
tus, " are strictly observed. Vice is not there a subject of 
ridicule. To corrupt or be corrupted is not called fashion, or 
the custom of the age : c there are few examples in this populous 
nation of the violation of conjugal faith."/' 

This was the reason of the expulsion of Childeric : he 
shocked their rigid virtue, which conquest had not had time to 
corrupt. 

26. — Of the Time when the Kings of the Franks became of age 

Barbarians who do not cultivate the earth have strictly 
speaking, no jurisdiction, and are, as we have already remem- 
bered, rather governed by the law of nations than by civil in- 
stitutions. They are, therefore, always armed. Thus Tacitus 
tells us " that the Germans undertook no afifairs either of a 
public or private nature unarmed. "^ They gave their vote 
by the sound of their arms./f As soon as they could carry them, 
they were presented to the assembly ; i they put a javelin into 
their hands ; / and from that moment they were out of their min- 
ority : they had been a part of the family, now they became a 
part of the republic.^ 

h " Prope soli Barbarorum singulif; 
uxoribus contenti sunt." — " De Moribus 
Germanorum." 

c " Exceptis admodum paucis qui non 
libidine, sed ob nobilitatem, plurimis 
nuptiis ambiuntur." — Tbid. 

a See Fredegarius's " Chronicle of the 
Year 628." 

e " Severa matrimonia nemo illic 

vitia ridet, nee corrumpere et corrumpi 
saeculum vocatur."— " De Moribus Ger- 



manorum. 



/ " Paucissima in t 
laulteria."— Ibid. 



am numerosa gentc 



g " Nihil neque publicx neque pri- 
vate rei nisi arniati agunt." — Ibid. 

h " Si displicuit sententia, fremitu 
aspernantur; sin placuit, frameas con- 
cutiunt." — Ibid. 

I " Sed arma sumere non ante cui- 
quam moris, quam civitas sufFecturum 
probaverit." 

j " Turn in ipso concilio vel princi- 
pum aliquis, vel pater, vel propinquus, 
scuto, frameaque juvenem ornant." 

k " Hxc apud illos toga, hie primus 
juvenf.T honos; ante hoc domus pars 
vidcntur, mox reipublicae." 



288 MONTESQUIEU 

" The eagles," said the King of the Ostrogoths,^ " cease to 
feed their young ones as soon as their wings and talons are 
formed ; the latter have no need of assistance when they are 
able themselves to seize their prey : it would be a disgrace if 
the young people in our armies were thought to be of an age un- 
fit for managing their estates or regulating the conduct of their 
lives. It is virtue that constitutes full age among the Goths." 

Childebert II was fifteen years old when Gontram, his uncle, 
declared that he was of age, and capable of governing by him- 
self.w We find in the Ripuarian laws that the age of fifteen, 
the ability of bearing arms and majority, went together. It is 
there said « " that if a Ripuarian dies, or is killed, and leaves a 
son behind him, that son can neither prosecute, nor be prose- 
cuted, till he has completely attained the age of fifteen ; and 
then he may either answer for himself or choose a champion." 
It was necessary that his mind should be sufificiently formed to 
be able to defend himself in court ; and that his body should 
have all the strength that was proper for his defence in single 
combat. Amongst the Burgundians,o who also made use of 
this combat in their judiciary proceedings, they were of age 
at fifteen. 

Agathias tells us that the arms of the Franks were light: 
they might, therefore, be of age at fifteen. In succeeding times 
the arms they made use of were heavy, and they were already 
greatly so in the time of Charlemagne, as appears by our capit- 
ularies and romances. Those who had fiefs,/' and were conse- 
quently obliged to do military service, were not then of age 
till they were twenty-one years old.Q 

27. — The same Subject continued 

We have seen that the Germans did not appear in their as- 
semblies before they were of age ; they were a part of the 
family, but not of the republic. This was the reason that the 
children of Clodomir, King of Orleans, and conqueror of Bur- 
gundy, were not proclaimed kings, because they were of too 

I Theodoric in " Cassiod." lib. I. ep. n Tit. 81. 

38. oTit. 87. 

m He was scarcely five years old, says p There was no change in the time 
" Gregory of Tours," lib. V. cap. i., with regard to the common people, 
when he succeeded to his father, in the q St. Louis was not of age till twenty- 
year 575. Gontram declared him of age one; this was altered by an edict of 
in the year 585; he was, therefore, at Charles V in the year 1374. 
that time no more than fifteen. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 289 

tender an age to be present at the assembly. They were not 
yet kings, but they had a right to the regal dignity as soon 
as they were able to bear arms ; and in the meantime, Clotilda, 
their grandmother, governed the state.'' But their uncles, 
Clotaire and Childcbert, assassinated them, and divided their 
kingdom. This was the cause that in the following ages princes 
in their minority were proclaimed kings immediately after the 
death of their fathers. Thus Duke Gondovald saved Childebert 
II from the cruelty of Chilperic, and caused him to be pro- 
claimed king when he was only five years old.-y 

But even in this change they followed the original spirit of 
the nation ; for the public acts did not pass in the name of the 
young monarch. So that the Franks had a double administra- 
tion: the one which concerned the person of the infant king, 
and the other which regarded the kingdom ; and in the fiefs 
there was a difference between the guardianship and the civil 
administration. 

28. — Of Adoption among the Germans 

As the Germans became of age by the wielding of arms, so 
they were adopted by the same sign. This Gontram, willing to 
declare his nephew Childebert of age and to adopt him for 
his son, made use of these words : " I have put this javelin into 
thy hands as a token that I have given thee all my kingdom. "f 
Then, turning towards the assembly, he added, " You see that 
my son Childebert is grown a man ; obey him." Theodoric, 
King of the Ostrogoths, intending to adopt the King of the 
Heruli, wrote to him thus : « " It is a noble custom of ours to be 
adopted by arms ; for men of courage alone deserve to be our 
children. Such is the efificacy of this act, that whoever is the ob- 
ject of it had rather die than submit to anything ignominious. 
Therefore, in compliance with the national usage, and because 
you are a man of courage, we adopt you for our son by these 
bucklers, these swords, these horses, which we send you as a 
present." 

r It appears from " dreRory of 5 " Gregory of Tours," lib. V. cap. i. ; 

Tours," lib. TIL, that she chose two " vix lustro Ktatis uno jam peracto qui 

natives of nurRundy, which had been die Dominicx Natalis regnare coepit." 

conquered by Clodoniir, to raise them / See " (iregory of Tours," lib. VII. 

to the see of Tours, which also belonged cap. xxiii. 

to Clodomir. « In " Cassiod." lib. IV. ep. 2. 

Vol. I. — ig 



29© MONTESQUIEU 

29. — Of the sanguinary Temper of the Kings of the Franks 

Clovis was not the only prince amongst the Franks who had 
invaded Gaul. Many of his relatives had penetrated into this 
country with particular tribes ; but as he had met with much 
greater success, and could grant considerable settlements to 
such as followed him, the Franks flocked to him from all parts, 
so that the other chiefs found themselves too weak to resist 
him. He formed a design of exterminating his whole house, and 
he succeeded.^' He feared, says Gregory of Tours,^^ lest the 
Franks should choose another chief. His children and succes- 
sors followed this practice to the utmost of their power. Thus 
the brother, the uncle, the nephew, and, what is still worse, the 
father or the son, were perpetually conspiring against their 
whole family. The law continually divided the monarchy ; 
while fear, ambition, and cruelty wanted to reunite it. 

30. — Of the national Assemblies of the Franks 

It has been remarked above that nations who do not cul- 
tivate the land enjoy great liberty. 

This was the case of the Germans. Tacitus says that they 
gave their kings, or chiefs, a very moderate degree of power ; x 
and Csesar adds further that in times of peace they had no com- 
mon magistrates ; but their princes administered justice in 
each village.^ Thus, as Gregory of Tours^ sufificiently proves, 
the Franks in Germany had no king. 

" The princes," says Tacitus, " deliberate on matters of no 
great concern ; while affairs of importance are submitted to the 
whole nation, but in such a manner that these very affairs 
which are under the cognizance of the people are at the same 
time laid before the princes. "o This custom was observed by 
them after their conquests, as may be seen in all their records.^ 

Tacitus says that capital crimes might be carried before the 

V " Gregory of Tours," lib. II. s Lib. II. 

w Ibid. a " De minoribus principes con- 

.ar " Nee Regibus libera aut infinita sultant, de majoribus omnes; ita tamen 

potestas. Cseterum neque animadver- ut ea quorum^ penes plebem arbitrium 

tare, neque vincire, neque verberare," est, apud principes pertractentur." — 

etc.—" De Moribus Germanorum." " De Moribus Germanorum." 

y " In pace nullus est communis b " Lex consensu PopuH fit et con- 

magistratus, sed principes regionum stitutione Regis." — " Capitularies of 

atque pagorum inter suos jus dicunt." Charles the Bald," anno 864, art. 6. 
— '^ De Bello Gall." lib. VI. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



291 



assembly .&lt;^ It was the same after the conquest, when the great 
vassals were tried before that body. 



31. — Of the Authority of the Clergy under the first Race 

The priests of barbarous nations are commonly invested with 
power, because they have both that authority which is due 
to them from their religious character, and that influence which 
amongst such a people is the offspring of superstition. Thus 
we see in Tacitus that priests were held in great veneration by 
the Germans, and that they presided in the assemblies of the 
people. c? They alone were permitted e to chastise, to bind, to 
smite ; which they did, not by order of the prince, or as his 
ministers of justice, but as by an inspiration of that Deity ever 
supposed to be present with those who made war. 

We ought not, therefore, to be astonished when, from the 
very beginning of the first race, we meet with bishops the dis- 
pensers of justice ; f when we see them appear in the assemblies 
of the nation ; when they have such a prodigious influence on 
the minds of sovereigns ; and when they acquire so large a 
share of property.^ 



c " Licet apud Concilium accusare et 
discrimen capitis intendere." — " De Mo- 
ribus Germanorum." 

d " Silentium per sacerdotes, quibus 
et coercendi jus est, imperatur." — Ibid. 

e " Nee Regibus libera aut infinita 
potestas. Cxterum neque animadver- 
tere, neque vincire, neque verberare, 
nisi sacerdotibus est permissum, non 
quasi in poenam, nee Ducis jussu, sed 



velut Deo imperante, quern adesse bel- 
latoribus credunt." — Ibid. 

f See the " Constitutions of Clotaire " 
in the year 560, art. 6. 

g The last ten chapters of this book, 
reunited in Books XXVIII., XXX., 
and XXXI., form a complete treatise 
upon the origin and early ages of the 
French monarchy, and they should be 
thus read to be understood. — Ed. 



BOOK XIX 

OF LAWS IN RELATION TO THE PRINCIPLES 
WHICH FORM THE GENERAL SPIRIT, THE 
MORALS, AND CUSTOMS OF A NATION 

I. — Of the Subject of this Book 

THIS subject is very extensive. In that crowd of ideas 
which presents itself to my mind, I shall be more at- 
tentive to the order of things than to the things them- 
selves. I shall be obliged to wander to the right and to the 
left, that I may investigate and discover the truth. 

2. — That it is necessary People's Minds should be prepared for 
the Reception of the best Lazvs 

Nothing could appear more insupportable to the Germans 
than the tribunal of Varus.o That which Justinian h erected 
amongst the Lazi, to proceed against the murderers of their 
king, appeared to them as an affair most horrid and barbarous. 
Mithridates,c haranguing against the Romans, reproached 
them more particularly for their law proceedings.^^ The 
Parthians could not bear with one of their kings who, having 
been educated at Rome, rendered himself affable and easy of 
access to all.^ Liberty itself has appeared intolerable to those 
nations who have not been accustomed to enjoy it. Thus pure 
air is sometimes disagreeable to such as have lived in a fenny 
country. 

Balbi, a Venetian, being at Pegu, was introduced to the 
king./ When the monarch was informed that they had no king 

a They cut out the tongues of the ad- c " Prompt! aditus, nova comitas, ig- 

vocates, and cried, " Viper, don't hiss." notrc Parthis virtutes, nova vitia."^ 

—Tacitus. Tacitus. 

b Agathias, lib. TV. f He has described this interview, 

c Justin, lib. XXXVTII. which happened in 1596. in the " Col- 

d " Calumnias litium." — Justin, lib. lection of Voyages for the establish- 

XXXVIII. ment of an India Company," vol. iii. 

part I. p. 33. 

292 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 293 

at Venice, he burst into such a fit of laughter that he was 
seized with a cough, and with difficulty could speak to his 
courtiers. What legislator could propose a popular govern- 
ment to a people like this ? 

3. — Of Tyranny 

There are two sorts of tyranny : one real, which arises from 
oppression ; the other is seated in opinion, and is sure to be 
left whenever those who govern establish things shocking to 
the existing ideas of a nation. 

Dio g tells us that Augustus was desirous of being called 
Romuhis; but having been informed that the people feared 
that he would cause himself to be crowned king, he changed 
his design. The old Romans were averse to a king, because 
they could not suffer any man to enjoy such power; these 
would not have a king, because they could not bear his man- 
ners. For though Caesar, the Triumvirs, and Augustus were 
really invested with regal power, they had preserved all the out- 
ward appearance of equality, while their private lives were a 
kind of contrast to the pomp and luxury of foreign monarchs ; 
so that when the Romans were resolved to have no king, this 
only signified that they would preserve their customs, and not 
imitate those of the African and Eastern nations. 

The same writer informs us that the Romans were exas- 
perated against Augustus for making certain laws which were 
too severe ; but as soon as he had recalled Pylades, the come- 
dian, whom the jarring of dififerent factions had driven out of 
the city, the discontent ceased. A people of this stamp have 
a more lively sense of tyranny when a player is banished than 
when they are deprived of their laws. 

4. — Of the general Spirit of Mankind 

Mankind are influenced by various causes: by the climate, 
by the religion, by the laws, by the maxims of government, by 
precedents, morals, and customs ; whence is formed a general 
spirit of nations. 

In proportion as, in every country, any one of these causes 
acts with more force, the others in the same degree are weak- 

g Book LIV. 532. 



294 MONTESQUIEU 

ened. Nature and the climate rule almost alone over the sav- 
ages ; customs govern the Chinese; the laws tyrannize in 
Japan; morals had formerly all their influence at Sparta; 
maxims of government, and the ancient simplicity of manners, 
once prevailed at Rome. 

5. — Hoiv far we should be attentive lest the general Spirit of a 

Nation be changed 

Should there happen to be a country whose inhabitants were 
of a social temper, open-hearted, cheerful, endowed with taste 
and a facility in communicating their thoughts; who were 
sprightly and agreeable; sometimes imprudent, often indis- 
creet; and besides had courage, generosity, frankness, and a 
certain notion of honor, no one ought to endeavor to restrain 
their manners by laws, unless he would lay a constraint on their 
virtues. If in general the character be good, the little foibles 
that may be found in it are of small importance. 

They might lay a restraint upon women, enact laws to re- 
form their manners and to reduce their luxury, but who knows 
but that by these means they might lose that peculiar taste 
which would be the source of the wealth of the nation, and that 
politeness which would render the country frequented by 
strangers ? 

It is the business of the legislature to follow the spirit of the 
nation, when it is not contrary to the principles of government ; 
for we do nothing so well as when we act with freedom, and 
follow the bent of our natural genius. 

If an air of pedantry be given to a nation that is naturally 
gay, the state will gain no advantage from it, either at home or 
abroad. Leave it to do frivolous things in the most serious 
manner, and with gayety the things most serious. 

6. — That Everything ought not to be corrected 

Let them but leave us as we are, said a gentleman of a nation 
which had a very great resemblance to that we have been de- 
scribing, and nature will repair whatever is amiss. She has 
given us a vivacity capable of offending, and hurrying us be- 
yond the bounds of respect: this same vivacity is corrected 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 295 

by the politeness it procures, inspiring us with a taste of the 
world, and, above all, for the conversation of the fair sex. 

Let them leave us as we are ; our indiscretions joined to our 
good nature would make the laws which should constrain our 
sociability not at all proper for us. 

7. — Of the Athenians and Lacedaemonians 

The Athenians, this gentleman adds, were a nation that had 
some relation to ours. They mingled gayety with business ; a 
stroke of raillery was as agreeable in the senate as in the 
theatre. This vivacity, which discovered itself in their councils, 
went along with them in the execution of their resolves. The 
character of the Spartans was one of gravity, seriousness, 
severity, and silence. It would have been as difficult to bring 
over an Athenian by teasing as it would a Spartan by diverting 
him. 

8. — Effects of a sociable Temper 

The more communicative a people are the more easily they 
change their habits, because each is in a greater degree a spec- 
tacle to the other, and the singularities of individuals are better 
observed. The climate which influences one nation to take 
pleasure in being communicative, makes it also delight in 
change, and that which makes it delight in change forms its 
taste. 

The society of the fair sex spoils the manners and forms the 
taste ; the desire of giving greater pleasure than others estab- 
lishes the embellishments of dress ; and the desire of pleasing 
others more than ourselves gives rise to fashions. This fash- 
ion is a subject of importance ; by encouraging a trifling turn 
of mind, it continually increases the branches of its commerce./* 

9. — Of the Vanity and Pride of Nations 

Vanity is as advantageous to a government as pride is dan- 
gerous. To be convinced of this we need only represent, on the 
one hand, the numberless benefits which result from vanity, as 
industry, the arts, fashions, politeness, and taste; on the other, 
the infinite evils which spring from the pride of certain nations, 
as laziness, poverty, a total neglect of everything — in fine, the 

h Fable of the Bees. 



296 MONTESQUIEU 

destruction of the nations which have happened to fall under 
their government, as well as of their own. Laziness is the ef- 
fect of pride ; i labor, a consequence of vanity. The pride of a 
Spaniard leads him to decline labor; the vanity of a French- 
man to work better than others. 

All lazy nations are grave ; for those who do not labor re- 
gard themselves as the sovereigns of those who do. 

If we search amongst all nations, we shall find that for the 
most part gravity, pride, and indolence go hand in hand. 

The people of Achim / are proud and lazy ; those who have 
no slaves, hire one, if it be only to carry a quart of rice a hun- 
dred paces ; they would be dishonored if they carried it them- 
selves. 

In many places people let their nails grow, that all may see 
they do not work. 

Women in the Indies k believe it shameful for them to learn 
to read : this is, they say, the business of their slaves, who sing 
canticles in the pagodas. In one tribe they do not spin ; in 
another they make nothing but baskets and mats ; they are not 
even to pound rice ; and in others they must not go to fetch 
water. These rules are established by pride, and the same 
passion makes them followed. There is no necessity for men- 
tioning that the moral qualities, according as they are blended 
with others, are productive of different effects ; thus pride, 
joined to a vast ambition and notions of grandeur, produced 
such effects among the Romans as are known to all the 
world. 

10. — Of the Character of the Spaniards and Chinese 

The characters of the several nations are formed of virtues 
and vices, of good and bad qualities. From the happy mixture 
of these, great advantages result, and frequently where it would 
be least expected ; there are others whence great evils arise — 
evils which one would not suspect. 

The Spaniards have been in all ages famous for their hon- 

iThe people who follow the khan of veniences of life, like the Europeans. — 

Malacamber, those of Carnataca and " Collection of Voyages for the Es- 

Coromandel, are proud and indolent; tablishment of an India Company," vol. 

they consume little, because they are i. p. 54. 
miserably poor; while the subjects of j See Dampier, vol. iii. 

the Mogul and the people of Ilindostan k " Edifying Letters," 12th collect, p. 

employ themselves, and enjoy the con- 80. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 297 

esty. Justin I mentions their fidelity in keeping whatever was 
intrusted to their care; they have frequently suffered death 
rather than reveal a secret. They have still the same fidelity 
for which they were formerly distinguished. All the nations 
who trade at Cadiz trust their fortunes to the Spaniards, and 
have never yet repented it. But this admirable quaUty, joined 
to their indolence, forms a mixture whence such efifects result 
as to them are most pernicious. The rest of the European na- 
tions carry on in their very sight all the commerce of their 
monarchy. 

The character of the Chinese is formed of another mixture, 
directly opposite to that of the Spaniards ; the precariousness 
of their subsistence »» inspires them with a prodigious activity, 
and such an excessive desire of gain, that no trading nation can 
confide in them." This acknowledged infidelity has secured 
them the possession of the trade to Japan. No European mer- 
chant has ever dared to undertake it in their name, how easy 
soever it might be for them to do it from their maritime prov- 
inces in the north. 

II. — A Reflection 

I have said nothing here with a view to lessen that infinite 
distance which must ever be between virtue and vice. God 
forbid that I should be guilty of such an attempt ! I would 
only make my readers comprehend that all political are not all 
moral vices ; and that all moral are not political vices ; and 
that those who make laws which shock the general spirit of a 
nation ought not to be ignorant of this. 

12. — Of Customs and Manners in a despotic State 

It is a capital maxim, that the manners and customs of a 
despotic empire ought never to be changed ; for nothing would 
more speedily produce a revolution. The reason is, that in 
these states there are no laws, that is, none that can be properly 
called so; there are only manners and customs; and if you 
ovei+urn these you overturn all. 

Laws are establislied, manners are inspired; these proceed 
from a general spirit, those from a particular institution: now 

/By the nature of the soil and climate. m Lib. XLIII. 

« Du Halde, vol. ii. 



298 MONTESQUIEU 

it is as dangerous, nay more so, to subvert the general spirit 
as to change a particular institution. 

There is less communication in a country where each, either 
as superior or inferior, exercises or is oppressed by arbitrary 
power, than there is in those where liberty reigns in every 
station. They do not, therefore, so often change their man- 
ners and behavior. Fixed and established customs have a near 
resemblance to laws. Thus it is here necessary that a prince 
or a legislator should less oppose the manners and customs of 
the people than in any other country upon earth. 

Their women are commonly confined, and have no influence 
in society. In other countries, where they have intercourse 
v/ith men, their desire of pleasing, and the desire men also 
have of giving them pleasure, produce a continual change of 
customs. The two sexes spoil each other ; they both lose their 
distinctive and essential quality ; what was naturally fixed be- 
comes quite unsettled, and their customs and behavior alter 
every day. 

13. — Of the Behavior of the Chinese 

But China is the place where the customs of the country 
can never be changed. Besides their women being absolutely 
separated from the men, their customs, like their morals, are 
taught in the schools. A man of letters may be known by his 
easy address.^ These things being once taught by precept, and 
inculcated by grave doctors, become fixed, like the principles 
of morality, and are never changed. 

114. — What are the natural Means of changing the Manners and 

Customs of a Nation 

We have said that the laws were the particular and precise 
institutions of a legislator, and manners and customs the in- 
stitutions of a nation in general. Hence it follows that when 
these manners and customs are to be changed, it ought not to 
be done by laws ; this would have too much the air of tyranny ; 
it would be better to change them by introducing other man- 
ners and other customs. 

Thus when a prince would make great alterations in his 
kingdom, he should reform by law what is established by law, 

o Du Halde, 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 299 

and change by custom what is settled by custom ; for it is very 
bad policy to change by law what ought to be changed by cus- 
tom. 

The law which obliged the Muscovites to cut off their beards 
and to shorten their clothes, and the rigor with which Peter I 
made them crop, even to their knees, the long cloaks of those 
who entered into the cities, were instances of tyranny. There 
are means that may be made use of to prevent crimes ; these 
are punishments : there are those for changing our customs ; 
these are examples. 

The facility and ease with which that nation has been pol- 
ished plainly show that this prince had a worse opinion of his 
people than they deserved ; and that they were not brutes, 
though he was pleased to call them so. The violent measures 
which he employed were needless ; he would have attained his 
end as well by milder methods. 

He himself experienced the facility of bringing about these 
alterations. The women were shut up, and in some measure 
slaves ; he called them to court ; he sent them silks and fine 
stufTs, and made them dress like the German ladies. This sex 
immediately relished a manner of life which so greatly flattered 
their taste, their vanity, and their passions ; and by their means 
it was relished by the men. 

What rendered the change the more easy was that their man- 
ners at that time were foreign to the climate, and had been in- 
troduced amongst them by conquest and by a mixture of na- 
tions. Peter I, in giving the manners and customs of Europe 
to a European nation, found a facility which he did not himself 
expect. The empire of the climate is the first, the most power- 
ful, of all empires. He had then no occasion for laws to change 
the manners and customs of his country ; it would have been 
sufficient to have introduced other manners and other customs. 

Nations are in general very tenacious of their customs ; to 
take them away by violence is to render them unhappy : we 
should not therefore change them, but engage the people to 
make the change themselves. 

All punishment which is not derived from necessity is tyran- 
nical. The law is not a mere act of power ; things in their own 
nature indifferent are not within its province. 



300 MONTESQUIEU 

15. — The Iniiuence of domestic Government on the political 

This alteration in the manners of women will doubtless have 
a great influence on the government of Muscovy. One natu- 
rally follows the other : the despotic power of the prince is con- 
nected with the servitude of women; the liberty of women with 
the spirit of monarchy. 

16. — How some Legislators have confounded the Principles 
zvhich govern Mankind 

Manners and customs are those habits which are not estab- 
lished by legislators, either because they were not able or were 
not willing to establish them. 

There is this difference between laws and manners, that the 
laws are most adapted to regulate the actions of the subject, 
and manners to regulate the actions of the man. There is this 
difference between manners and customs, that the former prin- 
cipally relate to the interior conduct, the latter to the exterior. 

These things have been sometimes confounded./' Lycurgus 
made the same code for the laws, manners, and customs, and 
the legislators of China have done the same. 

We ought not to be surprised that the legislators of China 
and Sparta should confound the laws, manners, and customs ; 
the reason is, their manners represent their laws, and their cus- 
toms their manners. 

The principal object which the legislators of China had in 
view was to make their subjects live in peace and tranquillity. 
They would have people filled with a veneration for one an- 
other, that each should be every moment sensible of his de- 
pendence on society, and of the obligations he owed to his fel- 
low-citizens. They therefore gave rules of the most extensive 
civility. 

Thus the inhabitants of the villages of China q practise 
amongst themselves the same ceremonies as those observed 
by persons of an exalted station ; a very proper method of 
inspiring mild and gentle dispositions, of maintaining peace 
and good order, and of banishing all the vices which spring 
from an asperity of temper. In effect, would not the freeing 

p Moses made the same code for laws founded the ancient customs with the 
and religion. The old Romans con- laws. 

q See Du Halde. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 301 

■ them from the rules of civiUty be to search out a method for 

' them to indulge their own humors ? 

Civility is in this respect of more value than politeness. Po- 
liteness flatters the vices of others, and civility prevents ours 
from being brought to light. It is a barrier which men have 
placed within themselves to prevent the corruption of each 
other. 

Lycurgus, whose institutions were severe, had no regard to 
civiHty in forming the external behavior, he had a view to that 
warlike spirit with which he would fain inspire his people. A 
people who were in a continual state of discipline and instruc- 
tion^ and who were endued with equal simplicity and rigor, 
atoned by their virtues for their want of complaisance. 

17. — Of the peculiar Quality of the Chinese Government 

The legislators of China went further.*- They confounded 
their religion, laws, manners, and customs; all these were 
morality, all these were virtue. The precepts relating to these 
four points were what they called rites ; and it was in the exact 
observance of these that the Chinese Government triumphed. 
They spent their whole youth in learning them, their whole life 
in the practice. They were taught by their men of letters, and 
were inculcated by the magistrates ; and as they included all 
the ordinary actions of life, when they found the means of 
making them strictly observed, China was well governed. 

Two things have contributed to the ease with which these 
rites are engraved on the hearts and minds of the Chinese ; 
one, the difficulty of writing, which, during the greatest part 
of their lives, wholly employs their attention,-^ because it is nec- 
essary to prepare them to read and understand the books in 
which they are comprised; the other, that the ritual precepts 
having nothing in them that is spiritual, but being merely 
rules of common practice, are more adapted to convince and 
strike the mind than things merely intellectual. 

Those princes who, instead of ruling by these rites, governed 
by the force of punishments, wanted to accomplish that by 
punishments which it is not in their power to produce, that is, 

r See the classic books from which s Tt is tliis which has established 

Father Du Haldc gives us some excel- emulation, which has banished laziness, 
lent extracts. and cultivated a love of learning. 



302 MONTESQUIEU 

to give habits of morality. By punishments, a subject is very 
justly cut ofif from society, who, having lost the purity of his 
manners, violates the laws; but if all the world were to lose 
their moral habits, would these re-establish them? Punish- 
ments may be justly inflicted to put a stop to many of the con- 
sequences of the general evil, but they will not remove the evil 
itself. Thus when the principles of the Chinese government 
were discarded, and morality was banished, the state fell into 
anarchy, and revolutions succeeded. 

1 8. — A Consequence drawn from the preceding Chapter 

Hence it follows that the laws of China are not destroyed 
by conquest. Their customs, manners, laws, and religion be- 
ing the same thing, they cannot change all these at once ; and 
as it will happen that either the conqueror or the conquered 
must change, in China it has always been the conqueror. For 
the manners of the conquering nation not being their customs, 
nor their customs their laws, nor their laws their religion, it 
has been more easy for them to conform by degrees to the van- 
quished people than the latter to them. 

There still follows hence a very unhappy consequence, which 
is, that it is almost impossible for Christianity ever to be es- 
tablished in China.a The vows of virginity, the assembling of 
women in churches, their necessary communication with the 
ministers of religion, their participation in the sacraments, au- 
ricular confession, extreme unction, the marriage of only one 
wife — all these overturn the manners and customs of the coun- 
try, and with the same blow strike at their religion and laws. 

The Christian religion, by the establishment of charity, by 
a public worship, by a participation of the same sacraments, 
seems to demand that all should be united ; while the rites of 
China seem to ordain that all should be separated. 

And as we have seen that this separation b depends, in gen- 
eral, on the spirit of despotism, this will show us the reason why 
monarchies, and indeed all moderate governments, are more 
consistent with the Christian religion.c 

a See the reasons given by the Chi- h See book IV. chap, iii., and book 

nese magistrates in their decrees for XIX. chap. xii. 

proscribing the Christian religion. c See book XXIV. chap. iii. 
' Edifying Letters," 17th collect. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 303 

19. — How this Union of Religion, Laws, Manners, and Customs 
amongst the Chinese was effected 

The principal object of government which the Chinese legis- 
lators had in view was the peace and tranquillity of the em- 
pire ; and subordination appeared to them as the most proper 
means to maintain it. Filled with this idea, they believed it 
their duty to inspire a respect for parents, and therefore exerted 
all their power to eftect it. They established an infinite num- 
ber of rites and ceremonies to do them honor when living, 
and after their death. It was impossible for them to pay such 
honors to deceased parents without being led to reverence the 
living. The ceremonies at the death of a father were more 
nearly related to religion ; those for a living parent had a 
greater relation to the laws, manners, and customs : however, 
these were only parts of the same code ; but this code was very 
extensive. 

A veneration for their parents was necessarily connected with 
a suitable respect for all who represented them ; such as old 
men, masters, magistrates, and the sovereign. This respect 
for parents supposed a return of love towards children, and 
consequently the same return from old men to the young, from 
magistrates to those who were under their jurisdiction, and 
from the emperor to his subjects. This formed the rites, and 
these rites the general spirit of the nation. 

We shall now show the relation which things in appearance 
the most indifferent may bear to the fundamental constitution 
of China. This empire is formed on the plan of a government 
of a family. If you diminish the paternal authority, or even if 
you retrench the ceremonies which express your respect for it, 
you weaken the reverence due to magistrates, who are con- 
sidered as fathers ; nor would the magistrates have the same 
care of the people, whom they ought to look upon as their chil- 
dren ; and that tender relation which subsists between the 
prince and his subjects would insensibly be lost. Retrench but 
one of these habits and you overturn the state. It is a thing in 
itself very indifferent whether the daughter-in-law rises every 
morning to pay such and such duties to her mother-in-law ; 
but if we consider that these exterior habits incessantly revive 
an idea necessary to be imprinted on all minds — an idea that 



304 MONTESQUIEU 

forms the ruling spirit of the empire — we shall see that it is 
necessary that such or such a particular action be performed. 

20. — Explanation of a Paradox relating to the Chinese 

It is very remarkable that the Chinese, whose lives are 
guided by rites, are nevertheless the greatest cheats upon earth. 
This appears chiefly in their trade, which, in spite of its natural 
tendency, has never been able to make them honest. He who 
buys of them ought to carry with him his own weights ; d every 
merchant having three sorts, the one heavy for buying, an- 
other light for selling, and another of the true standard for 
those who are upon their guard. It is possible, I believe, to 
explain this contradiction. 

The legislators of China had two objects in view : they were 
desirous that the people should be submissive and peaceful, and 
that they should also be laborious and industrious. By the 
nature of the soil and climate, their subsistence is very precari- 
ous ; nor can it be in any other way secured than by industry 
and labor. 

When everyone obeys, and everyone is employed, the state 
is in a happy situation. It is necessity, and perhaps the nature 
of the climate, that have given to the Chinese an inconceivable 
greediness for gain, and laws have never been made to restrain 
it. Everything has been forbidden when acquired by acts of 
violence ; everything permitted when obtained by artifice or 
labor. Let us not then compare the morals of China with those 
of Europe. Everyone in China is obliged to be attentive to 
what will be for his advantage ; if the cheat has been watchful 
over his own interest, he who is the dupe ought to be atten- 
tive to his. At Sparta they were permitted to steal ; In China 
they are suffered to deceive. 

21. — How the Laws ought to have a Relation to Manners and 

Customs 

It is only singular institutions which thus confound laws, 
manners, and customs — things naturally distinct and separate ; 
but though they are in themselves different, there is neverthe- 
less a great relation between them. 

d Lange's Journal in 1721 and 1722, in " Voyages to the North," vol. viii. p. 
3&lt;53- 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 305 

Solon being asked if the laws he had given to the Athenians 
were the best, he rephed, " I have given them the best they 
were able to bear " c — a fine expression that ought to be per- 
fectly understood by all legislators ! When Divine Wisdom 
said \o the Jews, " I have given you precepts which are not 
good," this signified that they had only a relative goodness ; 
which is the sponge that wipes out all the difficulties in the law 
of Moses. 

22. — The same Subject continued 

When a people have pure and regular manners, their laws 
become simple and natural. Plato f says that Rhadamanthus, 
who governed a nation extremely religious, finished every 
process with extraordinary despatch, administering only the 
oath on each accusation. " But," says the same Plato,s: " when 
a people are not religious we should never have recourse to an 
oath, except he who swears is entirely disinterested, as in the 
case of a judge and a witness." 

23. — Ho-cV the La-iVS are founded on the Manners of a People 

At the time when the manners of the Romans were pure, 
they had no particular law against the embezzlement of the 
public money. When this crime began to appear, it was 
thought so infamous, that to be condemned to restore h what 
they had taken was considered as a sufficient disgrace: for a 
proof of this, see the sentence of L. Scipio.i 

24. — The same Subject continued 

The laws which gave the right of tutelage to the mother 
were most attentive to the preservation of the infant's person ; 
those which granted it to the next heir were most attentive to 
the preservation of the vState. When the manners of a people are 
corrupted, it is much better to give the tutelage to the motlier. 
Amongst those whose laws confide in the manners of the sub- 
jects, the guardianship is granted either to the next heir or to 
the mother, and sometimes to both. 

If we reflect on the Roman laws, we shall find that the spirit 
of these was conformable to what T have advanced. At the 

&lt;&gt;Phitarcli. "Life of Solon." o. AT Thi.l. XTT. 

/" Of Laws," lib. XTL h " Tn simpliim," 

iLivy, lib. XXXVIIL 

Vol. I. — 20 



3o6 MONTESQUIEU 

time when the laws of the Twelve Tables were made, the man- 
ners of the Romans were most admirable. The guardianship 
was given to the nearest relative of the infant, from a con- 
sideration that he ought to have the trouble of the tutelage who 
might enjoy the advantage of possessing the inheritance. They 
did not imagine the life of the heir in danger though it was put 
into a person's hands who would reap a benefit by his death. 
But when the manners of Rome were changed, her legislators 
altered their conduct. " If, in the pupillary substitution," say 
Gains / and Justinian,^' " the testator is afraid that the substi- 
tute will lay any snares for the pupil, he may leave the vulgar 
substitution open,/ and put the pupillary into a part of the 
testament, which cannot be opened till after a certain time." 
These fears and precautions were unknown to the primitive 
Romans. 

25. — The same Subject continued 

The Roman law gave the liberty of making presents before 
marriage; after the marriage they were not allowed. This 
was founded on the manners of the Romans, who were led 
to marriage only by frugality, simplicity, and modesty; but 
might suffer themselves to be seduced by domestic cares, by 
complacency, and the constant tenor of conjugal felicity. 

A law of the Visigoths '" forbade the man giving more to the 
woman he was to marry than the tenth part of his substance, 
and his giving her anything during the first year of their mar- 
riage. This also took its rise from the manners of the country. 
The legislators were willing to put a stop to that Spanish os- 
tentation which only led them to display an excessive liberality 
in acts of magnificence. 

The Romans by their laws put a stop to some of the incon- 
veniences which arose from the most durable empire in the 
world — that of virtue ; the Spaniards, by theirs, would prevent 
the bad effects of a tyranny the most frail and transitory — that 
of beauty. 

y "Institut." lib. tit. 2, 6, sec. 2. to take the inheritance, I substitute in 

Ozels compilati9n at Leyden, in 1658. his stead," etc., the pupillary substitu- 

■ ,', I"''t'tut." lib. II., " de pupil, sub- tion, " If such a one dies before he ar- 

stit. ' sec. 3. rives at the age of puberty, I substi- 

/ The form of the vulgar substitution tute," etc. 

ran thus: "If such a one is unwilling m Lib. III. tit. 5, sec. 5. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 307 

26. — The same Subject continued 

The law of Theodosius and Valentinian « drew the causes of 
repudiation from the ancient manners and customs of the Ro- 
mans. It placed in the number of these causes the behavior 
of the husband who beat his wife P in a manner that disgraced 
the character of a free-born woman. This cause was omitted 
in the following laws : q for their manners, in this respect, had 
undergone a change, the Eastern customs having banished 
those of Europe. The first eunuch of the empress, wife to Jus- 
tinian II, threatened her, says the historian, to chastise her in 
the same manner as children are punished at school. Nothing 
but established manners, or those which they were seeking to 
establish, could raise even an idea of this kind. 

We have seen how the laws follow the manners of a people ; 
let us now observe how the manners follow the laws. 

2y. — How the Laws contribute to form the Manners, Customs, 
and Character of a Nation 

The customs of an enslaved people are a part of their servi- 
tude, those of a free people are a part of their liberty. 

I have spoken in the eleventh book r oi a free people, and 
have given the principles of their constitution: let us now see 
the effects which follow from this liberty, the character it is 
capable of forming, and the customs which naturally result 
from it. 

I do not deny that the climate may have produced a great 
part of the laws, manners, and customs of this nation ; but I 
maintain that its manners and customs have a close connec- 
tion with its laws. 

As there are in this state two visible powers — the legislative 
and executive — and as every citizen has a will of his own, and 
may at pleasure assert his independence, most men have a 
greater fondness for one of these powers than for the other, and 
the multitude have commonly neither equity nor sense enough 
to show an equal affection to both. 

And as the executive power, by disposing of all employ- 

n T.eR-. 8 cod. " de Repiidiis." p " Si verberibus quae inpenuis alien 

n And the law of the Twelve Tables. sunt, afficientcm probaverit." 
See Cicero's 2d " Philippic." &lt;7 In Nov. 117, cap. xiv. 

r Chap. vi. 



3o8 MONTESQUIEU 

ments, may give great hopes, and no fears, every man who 
obtains any favor from it is ready to espouse its cause ; while 
it is Hable to be attacked by those who have nothing to hope 
from it. 

All the passions being unrestrained, hatred, envy, jealousy, 
and an ambitious desire of riches and honors, appear in their 
extent ; were it otherwise, the state would be in the condition 
of a man weakened by sickness, who is without passions be- 
cause he is without strength. 

The hatred which arises between the two parties will always 
subsist, because it will always be impotent. 

These parties being composed of freemen, if the one becomes 
too powerful for the other, as a consequence of liberty this 
other is depressed ; while the citizens take the weaker side, with 
the same readiness as the hands lend their assistance to remove 
the infirmities and disorders of the body. 

Every individual is independent, and being commonly led 
by caprice and humor, frequently changes parties ; he aban- 
dons one where he left all his friends, to unite himself to an- 
other in which he finds all his enemies : so that in this nation 
it frequently happens that the people forget the laws of friend- 
ship, as well as those of hatred. 

The sovereign is here in the same case with a private per- 
son; and against the ordinary maxims of prudence is fre- 
quently obliged to give his confidence to those who have most 
oflfended him, and to disgrace the men who have best served 
him : he does that by necessity which other princes do by 
choice. 

As we are afraid of being deprived of the blessing we already 
enjoy, and which may be disguised and misrepresented to us ; 
and as fear always enlarges objects, the people are uneasy 
under such a situation, and believe themselves in danger, even 
in those moments when they are most secure. 

As those who with the greatest warmth oppose the executive 
power dare not avow the self-interested motives of their op- 
position, so much the more do they increase the terrors of the 
people, who can never be certain whether they are in danger or 
not. But even this contributes to make them avoid the real 
dangers, to which they may, in the end, be exposed. 

But the legislative body having the confidence of the people, 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 309 

and being more enlightened than they, may calm their un- 
easiness, and make them recover from the bad impressions they 
have entertained. 

This is the great advantage which this government has over 
the ancient democracies, in which the people had an immedi- 
ate power; for when they were moved and agitated by the 
orators, these agitations always produced their effect. 

But when an impression of terror has no certain object, 
it produces only clamor and abuse ; it has, however, this good 
effect, that it puts all the springs of government into motion, 
and fixes the attention of every citizen. But if it arises from a 
violation of the fundamental laws, it is sullen, cruel, and pro- 
duces the most dreadful catastrophes. 

Soon we should see a frightful calm, during which everyone 
would unite against that power which had violated the laws. 

If, when the uneasiness proceeds from no certain object, 
some foreign power should threaten the state, or put its pros- 
perity or its glory in danger, the little interests of party would 
then yield to the more strong and binding, and there would be 
a perfect coalition in favor of the executive power. 

But if the disputes were occasioned by a violation of the 
fundamental laws, and a foreign power should appear, there 
would be a revolution that would neither alter the constitution 
nor the form of government. For a revolution formed by lib- 
erty becomes a confirmation of liberty. 

A free nation may have a deliverer: a nation enslaved can 
have only another oppressor. 

For whoever is able to dethrone an absolute prince has a 
power sufficient to become absolute himself. 

As the enjoyment of liberty, and even its support and ])res- 
ervation consist in every man's being allowed to speak his 
thoughts, and to lay open his sentiments, a citizen in this state 
will say or write whatever the laws do not expressly forbid to 
be said or written. 

A people like this, being always in a ferment, are more 
easily conducted by their passions than by reason, which never 
produces any great effect in the mind of man ; it is therefore 
easy for those who govern to make them undertake enterprises 
contrary to their true interest. 

This nation is passionately fond of liberty, because this lib- 



3IO MONTESQUIEU 

erty is real ; and it is possible for it, in its defence, to sacrifice 
its wealth, its ease, its interest, and to support the burden of 
the heaviest taxes, even such as a despotic prince durst not lay 
upon his subjects. 

But as the people have a certain knowledge of the necessity 
of submitting to those taxes, they pay them from the well- 
founded hope of their discontinuance ; their burdens are heavy, 
but they do not feel their weight : while in other states the un- 
easiness is infinitely greater than the evil. 

This nation must therefore have a fixed and certain credit, 
because it borrows of itself and pays itself. It is possible for it 
to undertake things above its natural strength, and employ 
against its enemies immense sums of fictitious riches, which 
the credit and nature of the government may render real. 

To preserve its liberty, it borrows of its subjects : and the 
subjects, seeing that its credit would be lost if ever it were 
conquered, have a new motive to make fresh efforts in defence 
of its liberty. 

This nation, inhabiting an islapd, is not fond of conquering, 
because it would be weakened by distant conquests — especially 
as the soil of the island is good, for it has then no need of en- 
riching itself by war: and as no citizen is subject to another, 
each sets a greater value on his own liberty than on the glory 
of one or any number of citizens. 

Military men are there regarded as belonging to a profession 
which may be useful but is often dangerous, and as men whose 
very services are burdensome to the nation : civil qualifications 
are therefore more esteemed than the military. 

This nation, which liberty and the laws render easy, on be- 
ing freed from pernicious prejudices, has become a trading 
people ; and as it has some of those primitive materials of trade 
out of which are manufactured such things as from the artist's 
hand receive a considerable value, it has made settlements 
proper to procure the enjoyment of this gift of heaven in its 
fullest extent. 

As this nation is situated towards the north, and has many 
superfluous commodities, it must want also a great number of 
merchandise which its climate will not produce : it has there- 
fore entered into a great and necessary intercourse with the 
southern nations ; and making choice of those states whom it 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 311 

is willing to favor with an advantageous commerce, it enters 
into such treaties with the nation it has chosen as are recipro- 
cally useful to both. 

In a state where, on the one hand, the opulence is extreme, 
and on the other the taxes are excessive, they are hardly able 
to live on a small fortune without industry. Many, therefore, 
under a pretence of travelling, or of health, retire from 
amongst them, and go in search of plenty, even to the coun- 
tries of slavery. 

A trading nation has a prodigious number of little particular 
interests ; it may then injure or be injured in an infinite num- 
ber of ways. Thus it becomes immoderately jealous, and is 
more afflicted at the prosperity of others than it rejoices at its 
own. 

And its laws, otherwise mild and easy, may be so rigid with 
respect to the trade and navigation carried on with it, that it 
may seem to trade only with enemies. 

If this nation sends colonies abroad, it must rather be to ex- 
tend its commerce than its dominion. 

As men are fond of introducing into other places what they 
have established amongst themselves, they have given the peo- 
ple of the colonies their own form of government ; and this 
government carrying prosperity along with it, they have raised 
great nations in the forests they were sent to inhabit. 

Having formerly subdued a neighboring nation, which by 
its situation, the goodness of its ports, and the nature of its 
products, inspires it with jealousy, though it has given this 
nation its own laws, yet it holds it in great dependence : the 
(subjects there are free and the state itself in slavery. 

The conquered state has an excellent civil government, but 
is oppressed by the law of nations. Laws are imposed by one 
country on the other, and these are such as render its pros- 
perity precarious, and dependent on the will of a master. 

The ruling nation inhabiting a large island, and being in 
possession of a great trade, has with extraordinary ease grown 
powerful at sea ; and as the preservation of its liberties requires 
that it should have neither strongholds nor fortresses nor land 
forces, it has occasion for a formidable navy to defend it against 
invasions ; a navy which must be superior to that of all other 



312 MONTESQUIEU 

powers, who, employing- their treasures in wars on land, have 
not sufficient for those at sea. 

The empire of the sea has always given those who have en- 
joyed it a natural pride ; because, thinking themselves capable 
of extending their insults wherever they please, they imagine 
that their power is as boundless as the ocean. 

This nation has a great influence in the aflfairs of its neigh- 
bors ; for as its power is not employed in conquests, its friend- 
ship it more courted, and its resentment more dreaded, than 
could naturally be expected from the inconstancy of its govern- 
ment, and its domestic divisions. 

Thus it is the fate of the executive power to be almost always 
disturbed at home and respected abroad. 

Should this nation on some occasions become the centre of 
the negotiations of Europe, probity and good faith would be 
carried to a greater height than in other places ; because the 
ministers being frequently obliged to justify their conduct be- 
fore a popular council, their negotiations could not be secret ; 
and they would be forced to be, in this respect, a little more 
honest. 

Besides, as they would in some sort be answerable for the 
events which an irregular conduct might produce, the surest, 
the safest way for them would be to take the straightest path. 

If the nobles were formerly possessed of an immoderate 
power, and the monarch had found the means of abasing them 
by raising the people, the point of extreme servitude must have 
been that between humbling the nobility and that in which the 
people began to feel their power. 

Thus this nation, having been formerly subject to an arbi- 
trary power, on many occasions preserves the style of it, in such 
a manner as to let us frequently see upon the foundation of a 
free government the form of an absolute monarchy. 

With regard to religion, as in this state every subject has a 
free will, and must consequently be either conducted by the 
light of his own mind or by the caprice of fancy, it necessarily 
follows that everyone must either look upon all religion with 
indifference, by which means they are led to embrace the es- 
tablished religion, or they must be zealous for religion in gen- 
eral, by which means the number of sects is increased. 

It is not impossible but that in this nation there may be men 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 313 

of no religion, who would not, however, bear to be obHged to 
change that which they would choose, if they cared to choose 
any; for they would immediately perceive that their lives and 
fortunes are not more peculiarly theirs than their manner 
of thinking, and that whoever would deprive them of the one 
might even with better reason take away the other. 

If, amongst the different religions, there is one that has been 
attempted to be established by methods of slavery, it must there 
be odious ; because as we judge of things by the appendages 
we join with them, it could never present itself to the mind in 
conjunction with the idea of liberty. 

The laws against those who profess this religion could not, 
however, be of the sanguinary kind ; for liberty can never in- 
flict such punishments ; but they may be so rigorous as to do 
all the mischief that can be done in cold blood. 

It is possible that a thousand circumstances might concur to 
give the clergy so little credit, that other citizens may have 
more. Therefore, instead of a separation, they have chosen 
rather to support the same burdens as the laity, and in this 
respect to make only one body with them; but as they always 
seek to conciliate the respect of the people, they distinguish 
themselves by a more retired life, a conduct more reserved, and 
a greater purity of manners. 

The clergy not being able to protect religion, nor to be pro- 
tected by it, only seek to persuade ; their pens therefore furnish 
us with excellent works in proof of a revelation and of the 
providence of the Supreme Being. 

Yet the state prevents the sitting of their assemblies, and 
does not suffer them to correct their own abuses ; it chooses 
thus, through a caprice of liberty, rather to leave their reforma- 
tion imperfect than to suffer the clergy to be the reformers. 

Those dignities which make a fundamental part of the con- 
stitution are more fixed than elsewhere ; but, on the other 
hand, the great in this country of liberty are nearer upon a 
level with the people ; their ranks are more separated, and 
their persons more confounded. 

As those who govern have a power which, in some measure, 
has need of fresh vigor every day, they have a greater regard 
for such as arc useful to tlicni than for those who only con- 
tribute to their ainiiscment: we see, therefore, fewer courtiers, 



314 MONTESQUIEU 

flatterers, and parasites; in short, fewer of all those who make 
their own advantage of the folly of the great. 

Men are less esteemed for frivolous talents and attainments 
than for essential qualities ; and of this kind there are but two, 
riches and personal merit. 

They enjoy a solid luxury, founded, not on the refinements 
of vanity, but on that of real wants ; they ask nothing of nature 
but what nature can bestow. 

The rich enjoy a great superfluity of fortune, and yet have 
no relish for frivolous amusements ; thus, many having more 
wealth than opportunities of expense, employ it in a fantastic 
manner : in this nation they have more judgment than taste. 

As they are always employed about their own interest, they 
have not that politeness which is founded on indolence; and 
they really have not leisure to attain it. 

The era of Roman politeness is the same as that of the es- 
tablishment of arbitrary power. An absolute government 
produces indolence, and this gives birth to politeness. 

The more people there are in a nation who require circum- 
spect behavior, and care not to displease, the more there is of 
politeness. But it is rather the politeness of morals than that 
of manners which ought to distinguish us from barbarous na- 
tions. 

In a country where every man has, in some sort, a share in 
the administration of the government, the women ought 
scarcely to live with the men. They are therefore modest, that 
is, timid ; and this timidity constitutes their virtue : whilst the 
men without a taste for gallantry plunge themselves into a de- 
bauchery, which leaves them at leisure, and in the enjoyment 
of their full liberty. 

Their laws not being made for one individual more than an- 
other, each considers himself a monarch ; and, indeed, the men 
of this nation are rather confederates than fellow-subjects. 

As the climate has given many persons a restless spirit and 
extended views, in a country where the constitution gives 
every man a share in its government and political interests, 
conversation generally turns upon politics : and we see men 
spend their lives in the calculation of events which, considering 
the nature of things and caprices of fortune, or rather of men, 
can scarcely be thought subject to the rules of calculation. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 315 

In a free nation it is very often a matter of indifference 
whether individuals reason well or ill ; it is sufficient that they 
do reason : hence springs that liberty which is a security from 
the effects of these reasonings. 

But in a despotic government;, it is equally pernicious 
whether they reason well or ill ; their reasoning is alone suf- 
ficient to shock the principle of that government. 

Many people who have no desire of pleasing abandon them- 
selves to their own particular humor ; and most of those who 
have wit and ingenuity are ingenious in tormenting themselves : 
filled with contempt or disgust for all things, they are unhappy 
amidst all the blessings that can possibly contribute to promote 
their felicity. 

As no subject fears another, the whole nation is proud : for 
the pride of kings is founded only on their independence. 

Free nations are haughty ; others may more properly be 
called vain. 

But as these men who are naturally so proud live much by 
themselves, they are commonly bashful when they appear 
among strangers ; and we frequently see them behave for a 
considerable time with an odd mixture of pride and ill-placed 
shame. 

The character of the nation is more particularly discovered 
in their literary performances, in which we find the men of 
thought and deep meditation. 

As society gives us a sense of the ridicule of mankind, retire- 
ment renders us more fit to reflect on the folly of vice. Their 
satirical writings are sharp and severe, and we find amongst 
them many Juvenals, without discovering one Horace. 

In monarchies extremely absolute, historians betray the 
truth, because they are not at liberty to speak it; in states re- 
markably free, they betray the truth, because of their liberty 
itself; which always produces divisions, everyone becoming 
as great a slave to the prejudices of his faction as he could be in 
a despotic state. 

Their poets have more frequently an original rudeness of in- 
vention than that particular kind of delicacy which springs 
from taste ; we there find something which approaches nearer 
to the bold strength of a Michael Angelo than to the softer 
graces of a Raphael. 



BOOK XX 

OF LAWS IN RELATION TO COMMERCE CON- 
SIDERED IN ITS NATURE AND DISTINCTIONS 

I. — Of Commerce 

THE following subjects deserve to be treated in a more 
extensive manner than the nature of this work will 
permit.o Fain would I glide down a gentle river, but 
I am carried away by a torrent. 

Commerce is a cure for the most destructive prejudices ; for 
it is almost a general rule, that wherever we find agreeable 
manners, there commerce flourishes ; and that wherever there 
is commerce, there we meet with agreeable manners. 

Let us not be astonished, then, if our manners are now less 
savage than formerly. Commerce has everywhere diffused a 
knowledge of the manners of all nations : these are compared 
one with another, and from this comparison arise the greatest 
advantages. 

Commercial laws, it may be said, improve manners for the 
same reason that they destroy them. They corrupt the purest 
morals.^ This was the subject of Plato's complaints ; and we 
every day see that they polish and refine the most barbarous. 

2. — Of the Spirit of Commerce 

Peace is the natural efifect of trade. Two nations who trafific 
with each other become reciprocally dependent ; for if one has 
an interest in buying, the other has an interest in selling ; and 
thus their union is founded on their mutual necessities. 

But if the spirit of commerce unites nations, it does not in 

a This book was the beeinniriR of the were spoiled by the neighborhood and 

second part of "The Spirit of Laws" commerce of Marseilles; insomuch that 

in all the editions published during the they who formerly always conquered 

life of the author. — Ed. the Germans had now become inferior 

b Caesar said of the Gauls that they to them.—" War of the Gauls," lib. VI. 

316 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 317 

the same manner unite individuals. We see that in countries c 
where the people move only by the spirit of commerce, they 
make a traffic of all the humane, all the moral virtues ; the most 
trifling things, those which humanity would demand, are there 
done, or there given, only for money. 

The spirit of trade produces in the mind of a man a certain 
sense of exact justice, opposite, on the one hand, to robbery, 
and on the other to those moral virtues which forbid our always 
adhering rigidly to the rules of private interest, and suffer us 
to neglect this for the advantage of others. 

The total privation of trade, on the contrary, produces rob- 
bery^, which Aristotle ranks in the number of means of acquir- 
ing ; yet it is not at all inconsistent with certain moral virtues. 
Hospitality, for instance, is most rare in trading countries, 
while it is found in the most admirable perfection among na- 
tions of vagabonds. 

It is a sacrilege, says Tacitus, for a German to shut his door 
against any man whomsoever, whether known or unknown. 
He who has behaved with hospitality to a stranger goes to 
show him another house where this hospitality is also prac- 
tised ; and he is there received with the same humanity.c' But 
when the Germans had founded kingdoms, hospitality had be- 
come burdensome. This appears by two laws of the code of 
the Burgundians ; e one of which inflicted a penalty on every 
barbarian who presumed to show a stranger the house of a 
Roman ; and the other decreed, that whoever received a 
stranger should be indemnified by the inhabitants, every one 
being obliged to pay his proper proportion. 

3. — Of the Poverty of the People 

There are two sorts of poor ; those who are rendered such by 
the severity of government: these are, indeed, incapable of 
performing almost any great action, because their indigence 
is a consequence of their slavery. Others are poor, only be- 
cause they either despise or know not the conveniences of life ; 
and these are capable of accomplishing great things, because 
their poverty constitutes a part of their liberty. 

c Holland. mnnnnim." Vide Cxsar, " de Bello 

rf " Et qui niodo hnspcs fiicrat, mon- Clall." III). VI. 
strator hospitii." — " De Moribus Ger- c Tit. 38. 



3i8 MONTESQUIEU 

4. — Of Commerce in different Governments 

Trade has some relation to forms of government. In a mon- 
archy, it is generally fovmded on luxury ; and though it be 
also founded on real wants, yet the principal view with which 
it is carried on is to procure everything that can contribute 
to the pride, the pleasure, and the capricious whims of the na- 
tion. In republics, it is commonly founded on economy. Their 
merchants, having an eye to all the nations of the earth, bring 
from one what is wanted by another. It is thus that the re- 
publics of Tyre, Carthage, Athens, Marseilles, Florence, 
Venice, and Holland engaged in commerce. 

This kind of traffic has a natural relation to a republican 
government : to monarchies it is only occasional. For as it 
is founded on the practice of gaining little, and even less than 
other nations, and of remedying this by gaining incessantly, 
it can hardly be carried on by a people swallowed up in luxury, 
who spend much, and see nothing but objects of grandeur. 

Cicero was of this opinion, when he so justly said, " that he 
did not like that the same people should be at once both the 
lords and factors of the whole earth."/" For this would, indeed, 
be to suppose that every individual in the state, and the whole 
state collectively, had their heads constantly filled with grand 
views, and at the same time with small ones ; which is a con- 
tradiction. 

Not but that the most noble enterprises are completed also 
in those states which subsist by economical commerce: they 
have even an intrepidity not to be found in monarchies. And 
the reason is this : 

One branch of commerce leads to another, the small to the 
moderate, the moderate to the great ; thus he who has gratified 
his desire of gaining a little raises himself to a situation in which 
he is not less desirous of gaining a great deal. 

Besides, the grand enterprises of merchants are always neces- 
sarily connected with the affairs of the public. But, in mon- 
archies, these public affairs give as much distrust to the mer- 
chants as in free states they appear to give safety. Great en- 
terprises, therefore, in commerce are not for monarchical, but 
for republican, governments. 

/ " Nolo eundem populum imperatorem et portitorem esse terrarum." 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 319 

In short, an opinion of greater certainty, as to the possession 
of property in these states, makes them undertake everything. 
They flatter themselves with the hopes of receiving great ad- 
vantages from the smiles of fortune ; and thinking themselves 
sure of what they have already acquired, they boldly expose 
it in order to acquire more ; risking nothing, but as the means 
of obtaining. 

I do not pretend to say that any monarchy is entirely ex- 
cluded from an economical commerce ; but of its own nature 
it has less tendency towards it : neither do I mean that the re- 
publics with which we are acquainted are absolutely deprived 
of the commerce of luxury ; but it is less connected with their 
constitution. 

With regard to a despotic state, there is no occasion to men- 
tion it. A general rule : A nation in slavery labors more to 
preserve than to acquire ; a free nation, more to acquire than 
to preserve. 

5. — Of Nations that have entered into an economical Commerce 

Marseilles, a necessary retreat in the midst of a tempestuous 
sea ; Marseilles, a harbor which all the winds, the shelves of the 
sea, the disposition of the coasts, point out for a landing-place, 
became frequented by mariners ; while the sterility of the ad- 
jacent country determined the citizens to an economical com- 
merce.gr It was necessary that they should be laborious to 
supply what nature had refused ; that they should be just, in 
order to live among barbarous nations, from whom they were 
to derive their prosperity ; that they should be moderate, to 
the end that they might always taste the sweets of a tranquil 
government ; in fine, that they should be frugal in their man- 
ners, to enable them to subsist by trade — a trade the more cer- 
tain as it was less advantageous. 

We everywhere see violence and oppression give birth to a 
commerce founded on economy, while men are constrained to 
take refuge in marshes, in isles, in the shallows of the sea, and 
even on rocks themselves. Thus it was that Tyre, Venice, and 
the cities of Holland were founded. Fugitives found there a 
place of safety. It was necessary that they should subsist ; they 
drew, therefore, their subsistence from all parts of the world. 

g Justin, lib. XLIII. cap. iii. 



320 MONTESQUIEU 

6. — Some Effects of an extensive Navigation 

It sometimes happens that a nation, when engaged in an 
economical commerce, having need of the merchandise of one 
country, which serves as a capital or stock for procuring the 
commodities of another, is satisfied with making very little 
profit, and frequently none at all, in trading with the former, in 
expectation of gaining greatly by the latter. Thus, when the 
Dutch were almost the only nation that carried on the trade 
from the south to the north of Europe, the French wines which 
they imported to the north were in some measure only a cap- 
ital or stock for conducting their commerce in that part of the 
world. 

It is a known fact that there are some kinds of merchandise 
in Holland which, though imported from afar, sell for very 
little more than they cost upon the spot. They account for it 
thus : a captain who has occasion to ballast his ship will load it 
with marble ; if he wants wood for stowage, he will buy it ; 
and, provided he loses nothing by the bargain, he will think 
himself a gainer. Thus it is that Holland has its quarries and 
its forests. 

Further, it may happen so that not only a commerce which 
brings in nothing shall be useful, but even a losing trade shall 
be beneficial. I have heard it affirmed in Holland that the 
whale fishery in general does not answer the expense ; but it 
must be observed that the persons employed in building the 
ships, as also those who furnish the rigging and provisions, are 
jointly concerned in the fishery. Should they happen to lose 
in the voyage, they have had a profit in fitting out the vessel. 
This commerce, in short, is a kind of lottery, and every one is 
allured with the hopes of a prize. Mankind are generally fond 
of gaming; and even the most prudent have no aversion to it, 
when the disagreeable circumstances attending it, such as dis- 
sipation, anxiety, passion, loss of time, and even of life and for- 
tune, are concealed from their view. 

7- — The Spirit of England with respect to Commerce 

The tariff or customs of England are very unsettled with 
respect to other nations ; they are changed, in some measure, 
with every parliament, either by taking off particular duties, or 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 321 

by imposing new ones. They endeavor by these means still 
to preserve their independence. Supremely jealous with re- 
spect to trade, they bind themselves but little by treaties, and 
depend only on their own laws. 

Other nations have made the interests of commerce yield to 
those of politics ; the English, on the contrary, have ever made 
their political interests give way to those of commerce. 

They know better than any other people upon earth how to 
value, at the same time, these three great advantages — religion, 
commerce, and liberty. 

8. — In what Manner economical Commerce has been sometimes 

restrained 

In several kingdoms laws have been made extremely proper 
to humble the states that have entered into economical com- 
merce. They have forbidden their importing any merchandise, 
except the product of their respective countries ; and have 
permitted them to traffic only in vessels built in the kingdom 
to which they brought their commodities. 

It is necessary that the kingdom which imposes these laws 
should itself be able easily to engage in commerce ; otherwise 
it will, at least, be an equal sufferer. It is much more ad- 
vantageous to trade with a commercial nation, whose profits 
are moderate, and who are rendered in some sort dependent by 
the affairs of commerce ; with a nation whose larger views and 
whose extended trade enable them to dispose of their super- 
fluous merchandise ; with a wealthy nation, who can take off 
many of their commodities, and make them a quicker return in 
specie ; with a nation under a kind of necessity to be faithful, 
pacific from principle, and that seeks to gain, and not to con- 
quer : it is much better, I say, to trade with such a nation than 
with others, their constant rivals, who will never grant such 
great advantages. 

9. — Of the Prohibition of Commerce 

It is a true maxim that one nation should never exclude an- 
other from trading with it, except for very great reasons. The 
Japanese trade only with two nations, the Chinese and the 
Dutch. The Chinese/i gain a thousand per cent, upon sugars, 

/i Du Halde, vol. ii. p. 170. 

Vol. I. — 21 



32 2 MONTESQUIEU 

and sometimes as much by the goods they take in exchange. 
The Dutch make nearly the same profits. Every nation that 
acts upon Japanese principles must necessarily be deceived ; 
for it is competition which sets a just value on merchandise, and 
establishes the relation between them. 

Much less ought a state to lay itself under an obligation of 
selling its manufactures only to a single nation, under a pre- 
tence of their taking all at a certain price. The Poles, in this 
manner, dispose of their corn to the city of Dantzig ; and sev- 
eral Indian princes have made a like contract for their spices 
with the Dutch. i These agreements are proper only for a 
poor nation, whose inhabitants are satisfied to forego the hopes 
of enriching themselves, provided they can be secure of a cer- 
tain subsistence ; or for nations whose slavery consists either in 
renouncing the use of those things which nature has given 
them, or in being obliged to submit to a disadvantageous com- 
merce. 

10, — An Institution adapted to economical Commerce 

In states that carry on an economical commerce, they have 
luckily established banks, which by their credit have formed 
a new species of wealth : but it would be quite wrong to intro- 
duce them into governments whose commerce is founded only 
on luxury. The erecting of banks in countries governed by an 
absolute monarch supposes money on the one side, and on the 
other power: that is, on the one hand, the means of procur- 
ing everything, without any power; and on the other, the 
power, without any means of procuring at all. In a govern- 
ment of this kind, none but the prince ever had, or can have, a 
treasure ; and wherever there is one, it no sooner becomes great 
than it becomes the treasure of the prince. 

For the same reason, all associations of merchants, in order 
to carry on a particular commerce, are seldom proper in abso- 
lute governments. The design of these companies is to give 
to the wealth of private persons the weight of public riches. 
But in those governments this weight can be found only in the 
prince. Nay, they are not even always proper in states en- 
gaged in economical commerce ; for, if the trade be not so 
great as to surpass the management of particular persons, it 

t'This was first established by the Portuguese.— Fr. Pirard's "Voyages," 
chap. XV. part II. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 323 

is much better to leave it open than, by exclusive privileges, to 
restrain the liberty of commerce. 

II. — The same Subject continued 

A free port may be established in the dominions of states 
whose commerce is economical. That economy in the govern- 
ment which always attends the frugality of individuals is, if I 
may so express myself, the soul of its economical commerce. 
The loss it sustains with respect to customs it can repair by 
drawing from the wealth and industry of the republic. But in a 
monarchy a step of this kind must be opposite to reason ; for it 
could have no other effect than to ease luxury of the weight of 
taxes. This would be depriving itself of the only advantage 
that luxury can procure, and of the only curb which, in a con- 
stitution like this, it is capable of receiving. 

12. — Of the Freedom of Commerce 

The freedom of commerce is not a power granted to the 
merchants to do what they please ; this would be more properly 
its slavery. The constraint of the merchant is not the constraint 
of commerce. It is in the freest countries that the merchant 
finds innumerable obstacles ; and he is never less crossed by 
laws than in a country of slaves. 

England prohibits the exportation of her wool ; coals must 
be brought by sea to the capital ; no horses, except geldings, 
are allowed to be exported ; and the vessels of her colonies 
trading to Europe must take in water in England.;' The Eng- 
lish constrain the merchant, but it is in favor of commerce. 

13. — What it is that destroys this Liberty 

Wherever commerce subsists, customs are established. 
Commerce is the exportation and importation of merchandise, 
with a view to the advantage of the state : customs are a certain 
right over this same exportation and importation, founded also 
on the advantage of the state. Hence it becomes necessary that 
the state should be neutral between its customs and its com- 
merce, that neither of these two interferes with the other, and 
then the inha1)itants enjoy a free commerce. 

f Act of Navigation, ifi^o. Tt is only Boston and Pliilailelpliia send their 
in time of war that the merchants of vessels directly to the Mediterranean. 



324 MONTESQUIEU 

The farming of the customs destroys commerce by its injus- 
tice and vexations, as well as by the excess of tli^ imposts : but 
independent of this, it destroys it even more by the difficulties 
that arise from it and by the formalities it exacts. In England, 
where the customs are managed by the king's officers, business 
is negotiated with a singular dexterity : one word of writing 
accomplishes the greatest affairs. The merchant needs not 
lose an infinite deal of time ; he has no occasion for a particular 
commissioner, either to obviate all the difficulties of the farmers, 
or to submit to them. 

14. — The Laivs of Commerce concerning the Confiscation of 

Merchandise 

The Magna Charta of England forbids the seizing and con- 
fiscating, in case of war, the effects of foreign merchants, ex- 
cept by way of reprisals. It is an honor to the English nation 
that they have made this one of the articles of their liberty. 

In the late war between Spain and England, the former made 
a law which punished with death those who brought English 
merchandise into the dominions of Spain ; and the same pen- 
alty on those who carried Spanish merchandise into England.^ 
An ordinance like this cannot, I believe, find a precedent in any 
laws but those of Japan. It equally shocks humanity, the spirit 
of commerce, and the harmony which ought to subsist in the 
proportion of penalties ; it confounds all our ideas, making that 
a crime against the state which is only a violation of civil polity. 

15. — Of seizing the Persons of Merchants 

Solon made a law that the Athenians should no longer seize 
the body for civil debts.' This law he received from Egypt. 
It had been made by Boccoris, and renewed by Sesostris.w 

This law is extremely good with respect to the generality 
of civil affairs ; but there is sufficient reason for its not being 
observed in those of commerce." For as merchants are obliged 
to intrust large sums, frequently for a very short time, and to 
pay money as well as to receive it, there is a necessity that the 

k Published in Cadiz in March, 1740. in preventing the arms and plough of 

/ Plutarch, in his treatise against any man from being taken in pledge, 

lending upon usury. and yet permitting the taking of the 

tn Diodorus, book T. part TI. chap. iii. man himself.— Diodorus, book I. part 

n The Greek legislators were to blame II. chap. iii. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 325 

debtor should constantly fulfil his engagements at the time pre- 
fixed ; and hence it becomes necessary to lay a constraint on 
his person. 

In affairs relating to common civil contracts, the law ought 
not to permit the seizure of the person ; because the liberty of 
one citizen is of greater importance to the public than the ease 
or prosperity of another. But in conventions derived from 
commerce, the law ought to consider the public prosperity as 
of greater importance than the liberty of a citizen ; which, how- 
ever, does not hinder the restrictions and limitations that hu- 
manity and good policy demand. 

16. — An excellent Law 

Admirable is that law of Geneva which excludes from the 
magistracy, and even from the admittance into the great coun- 
cil, the children of those who have lived or died insolvent, except 
they have discharged their father's debts. It has this effect : 
it creates a confidence in the merchants, in the magistrates, 
and in the city itself. There the credit of the individual has 
still all the weight of public credit. 

17. — A Lazv of Rhodes 

The inhabitants of Rhodes went further. Sextus Empiricus 
observes that among those people a son could not be excused 
from paying his father's debts by renouncing the succession. 
This law of Rhodes was calculated for a republic, founded on 
commerce. Now I am inclined to think that reasons drawn 
from commerce itself should make this limitation, that the 
debts contracted by the father since the son's entering into com- 
merce should not affect the estate or property acquired by the 
latter. A merchant ought always to know his obligations, and 
to square his conduct by his circumstances and present fortune. 

18. — Of the Judges of Commerce 

Xenophon, in his book of Revenues,/* would have rewards 
given to those overseers of commerce who despatched the 
causes brought before them with the greatest expedition. He 
was sensible of the need of our modern jurisdiction of a consul. 

Hypotiposes, book I. chap. xiv. p " De Proventibus," III. 



326 MONTESQUIEU 

The affairs of commerce are but little susceptible of formal- 
ities. They are the actions of a day, and are every day followed 
by others of the same nature. Hence it becomes necessary that 
every day they should be decided. It is otherwise with those 
actions of life whice have a principal influence on futurity, but 
rarely happen. We seldom marry more than once ; deeds and 
wills are not the work of every day ; we are but once of age, 

Plato q says that in a city where there is no maritime com- 
merce there ought not to be above half the number of civil 
laws : this is very true. Commerce brings into the same coun- 
try different kinds of people ; it introduces also a great number 
of contracts and species of wealth, with various ways of acquir- 
ing it. 

Thus in a trading city there are fewer judges, and more laws. 

19. — TJiat a Prince ought not to engage himself in Commerce 

Theophilus,^ seeing a vessel laden with merchandise for his 
wife Theodora, ordered it to be burned. " I am emperor," said 
he, " and you make me the master of a galley. By what means 
shall these poor men gain a livelihood if we take their trade 
out of their hands ? " He might have added. Who shall set 
bounds to us if we monopolize all ourselves ? Who shall oblige 
us to fulfil our engagements? Our courtiers will follow our 
example ; they will be more greedy and more unjust than we : 
the people have some confidence in our justice, they will have 
none in our opulence : all these numerous duties, the cause of 
their wants, are certain proofs of ours. 

20. — The same Subject continued 

When the Portuguese and Castilians bore sway in the East 
Indies, commerce had such opulent branches that their princes 
did not fail to seize them. This ruined their settlements in those 
parts of the world. 

The viceroy of Goa granted exclusive privileges to particular 
persons. The people had no confidence in these men ; and the 
commerce declined, by the perpetual change of those to whom 
it was intrusted ; nobody took care to improve it, or to leave 
it entire to his successor. In short, the profit centred in a few 
hands, and was not sufficiently extended. 

«"On Laws," book VIII. r Zonaras. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 327 

21. — Of the Commerce of the Nobility in a Monarchy 

In a monarchical government, it is contrary to the spirit of 
commerce that any of the nobihty should be merchants. 
" This," said the Emperors Honorius and Theodosius,-^ " would 
be pernicious to cities ; and would remove the facility of buying 
and selling between the merchants and the plebeians." 

It is contrary to the spirit of monarchy to admit the nobility 
into commerce. The custom of suffering the nobility of Eng- 
land to trade is one of those things which have there mostly 
contributed to weaken the monarchical government. 

22. — A singular Reflection 

Persons struck with the practice of some states imagine that 
in France they ought to make laws to engage the nobility to 
enter into commerce. But these laws would be the means of 
destroying the nobility, without being of any advantage to 
trade. The practice of this country is extremely wise ; mer- 
chants are not nobles, though they may become so. They have 
the hopes of obtaining a degree of nobility, unattended with 
its actual inconveniences. There is no surer way of being ad- 
vanced above their profession than to manage it well, or with 
success ; the consequence of which is generally an affluent 
fortune. 

Laws which oblige every one to continue in his profession, 
and to devolve it upon his children, neither are nor can be of 
use in any but despotic kingdoms ; where nobody either can or 
ought to have emulation.^ 

Let none say that every one will succeed better in his profes- 
sion when he cannot change it for another : I say that a person 
will succeed best when those who have excelled hope to rise 
to another. 

The possibility of purchasing honor with gold encourages 
many merchants to put themselves in circumstances by which 
they may attain it. I do not take it upon me to examine the 
justice of thus bartering for money the price of virtue. There 
are governments where this may be very useful. 

In France the dignity of the long robe, which places those 

s Leg. " Nobiliores," Cod. "dc / This is actually very often the case 

Comiti," et leg. " ult. de rescind, vcn- in such governments, 
dit." 



328 MONTESQUIEU 

who wear it between the great nobihty and the people, and with- 
out having such shining honors as the former, has all their priv- 
ileges ; a dignity which, while this body, the depositary of the 
laws, is encircled with glory, leaves the private members in a 
mediocrity of fortune ; a dignity in which there are no other 
means of distinction but by a superior capacity and virtue, yet 
which still leaves in view one much more illustrious : the war- 
like nobility, likewise, who conceive that, whatever degree of 
wealth they are possessed of, they may still increase their for- 
tunes ; who are ashamed of augmenting, if they begin not with 
dissipating, their estates ; who always serve their prince with 
their whole capital stock, and when that is sunk make room for 
others, who follow their example ; who take the field that they 
may never be reproached with not having been there ; who, 
when they can no longer hope for riches, live in expectation of 
honors ; and when they have not obtained the latter, enjoy the 
consolation of having acquired glory : all these things together 
have necessarily contributed to augment the grandeur of this 
kingdom ; and if for two or three centuries it has been inces- 
santly increasing in power, this must be attributed not to For- 
tune, who was never famed for constancy, but to the goodness 
of its laws. 

23. — To what Nations Commerce is prejudicial 

Riches consist either in lands or in movable efifects. The 
soil of every country is commonly possessed by the natives. 
The laws of most states render foreigners unwilling to purchase 
their lands ; and nothing but the presence of the owmer im- 
proves them : this kind of riches, therefore, belongs to every 
state in particular ; but movable effects, as money, notes, bills 
of exchange, stocks in companies, vessels, and, in fine, all mer- 
chandise, belong to the whole world in general ; in this re- 
spect, it is composed of but one single state, of which all the 
societies upon earth are members. The people who possess 
more of these movable efifects than any other on the globe are 
the most opulent. Some states have an immense quantity ac- 
quired by their commodities, by the labor of their mechanics, 
by their industry, by their discoveries, and even by chance. 
The avarice of nations makes them quarrel for the movables 
of the whole universe. If we could find a state so unhappy as 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



329 



to be deprived of the effects of other countries, and at the same 
time of almost all its own, the proprietors of the lands would be 
only planters to foreigners. This state, wanting all, could ac- 
quire nothing; therefore, it would be much better for the in- 
habitants not to have the least commerce with any nation upon 
earth, for commerce in these circumstances must necessarily 
lead them to poverty. 

A country that constantly exports fewer manufactures or 
commodities than it receives will soon find the balance sinking ; 
it will receive less and less, until, falling into extreme poverty, 
it will receive nothing at all. 

In-trading countries the specie, which suddenly vanishes, 
quickly returns ; because those nations that have received it 
are its debtors. But it never returns into those states of which 
we have just been speaking, because those who have received 
it owe them nothing. 

Poland will serve us for an example. It has scarcely any of 
those things which we call the movable effects of the universe, 
except corn, the produce of its lands. Some of the lords pos- 
sess entire provinces ; they oppress the husbandmen, in order 
to have greater quantities of corn, which they send to strangers, 
to procure the superfluous demands of luxury. If Poland had 
no foreign trade, its inhabitants would be happier. The 
grandees, who would have only their corn, would give it to their 
peasants for subsistence ; as their too extensive estates would 
become burdensome, they would divide them amongst their 
peasants ; every one would find skins or wool in their herds or 
flocks, so that they would no longer be at an immense expense 
in providing clothes ; the great, who are ever fond of luxury, 
not being able to find it but in their own country, would en- 
courage the labor of the poor. This nation, I afifirm, would 
then become more flourishing, at least if it did not become bar- 
barous ; and this the laws might easily prevent. 

Let us next consider Japan. The vast quantity of what they 
receive is the cause of the vast quantity of merchandise they 
send abroad. Things are thus in as nice an equilibrium as if 
the importation and exportation were but small. Besides, this 
kind of exuberance in the state is productive of a thousand ad- 
vantages ; there is a greater consumption, a greater quantity 
of those things on which the arts are exercised ; more men 



330 MONTESQUIEU 

employed, and more numerous means of acquiring power ; ex- 
igencies may also happen that require a speedy assistance, 
which so opulent a state can better afford than any other. It 
is difficult for a country to avoid having superfluities ; but it 
is the nature of commerce to render the superfluous useful, and 
the useful necessary. The state will be, therefore, able to af- 
ford necessaries to a much greater number of subjects. 

Let us say, then, that it is not those nations who have need 
of nothing that must lose by trade ; it is those who have need 
of everything. It is not such people as have a isufficiency 
within themselves, but those who are most in want, that will 
find an advantage in putting a stop to all commercial inter- 
course. 



CHOICE EXAMPLES OF EARLY PRINTLNG AND 

ENGRAVING. 

Fac-similes from Rare and Curious Books. 



A PAGE FROM THE PSALMORUM CODEX. 

Prinied in 14^/ hv Fust and Schoeffei , being the first printed Psalter and the first 

printed book with a printed date. 

It is generally conceded that this famous Psalter carried the intricacies of print- 
ing much further than had been dreamed of by its first projector. It should be 
noted that the credit so long accorded to Schoeffer as the inventor and producer of 
the initials printed in colors, which render this Psalter so remarkable, may after all 
belong (like the glory of printing the first Bible) to Gutenberg alone, for it is a 
well-established fact that he had been preparing a large Gothic type for the pur- 
pose of producing a great church-service Psalter ; and it appears probable that 
he prepared at the same time a series of colored initials, which he used by way of 
essay in the " Donatus." But even allowing this -to be the case, the perfect manner 
in which the printing itself is executed, in the first serious attempt to produce in a 
printed book the effects hitherto produced by the hand of the illuminator, is suffi- 
cient to secure to Schoeffer's name a place among the greatest masters of his art. 
The best preserved copy of this interesting monument of the early days of printing 
is that in the Imperial Library of Vienna. Other copies are preserved in the British 
Museum and the French National Library. 



^nins oicte poQ &amp;(hl tnniratis-lHUimtmdmu 

3, flfimf tnagnu oiiinuraitr aDoannus^s IStmrr • 
i*wiima uuat&gt; pft feflii tp^ie)imiraio?iu- 






i 



Mm^ Oinn amfeitnofl^p&gt;"ttnitr ari^miitr- 

^wsw qui = 
tionabijtin enouar- 
amfilio imptonl rtin 
utaprtDiinoItrritnhi 
nitt)rOrapr(hIrdrnofr° 
liit,j©EtinrflfDmuo 
lums n^irtmlrgt niie mrDitabtf btr ar 
nodr, 0t rrit tan$ lionu qb platatu iRr 
rmis tmirfue aq1|:qb fhidu fuu babittn 
n ipr fuo ©t fbliu ri9 no ttfluftn oFa qmqj 
' fariftjjIirrabuC ofirimpijnbfir frD 
taniptiUus quF jnrinmms a fanr mtr, 
Ji Dm nonrrftirgf rtiitpt) in iuDidornr^ 
prcb2ea in rofilio iuIloQ GLoi noiur Dtie 
uia iultouri itrr inipiou imbit,o Ra j^ 




M 



BOOK XXI 

" — —Docuit qu&lt;B maximus Atlas. — ViRGIL, ^neid. 

OF LAWS IN RELATION TO COMMERCE, CON- 
SIDERED IN THE REVOLUTIONS IT HAS MET 
WITH IN THE WORLD 

I. — Some general Considerations 

THOUGH commerce be subject to great revolutions, yet 
it is possible that certain physical causes, as the quality 
of the soil, or the climate, may fix its nature forever. 
We at present carry on the trade of the Indies merely by 
means of the silver which we send thither. The Romans carried 
annually thither about fifty millions of sesterces ; a and this sil- 
ver, as ours is at present, was exchanged for merchandise, which 
was brought to the West. Every nation that ever traded to the 
Indies has constantly carried bullion and brought merchandise 
in return.^ 

It is nature itself that produces this effect. The Indians have 
their hearts adapted to their manner of living. Our luxury 
cannot be theirs ; nor theirs our wants. Their climate demands 
and permits hardly anything which comes from ours. They go 
in a great measure naked ; such clothes as they have the coun- 
try itself furnishes ; and their religion, which is deeply rooted, 
gives them an aversion for those things that serve for our 
nourishment. They want, therefore, nothing but our bullion 
to serve as the medium of value; and for this they give us 
merchandise in return, with which the frugality of the people 
and the nature of the country furnish them in great abundance. 
Those ancient authors who have mentioned the Indies describe 
them just as we now find them, as to their policy, customs, and 
marners.c The Indies have ever been the same Indies they 

a P'iny. lib. VT. cnp. xxiii. r See Pliny, hook VI. chap, xix., aod 

h Sor Pnusanias, " Laconia," sine III. Strabo, book XV. 
cap. xiL 

331 



332 MONTESQUIEU 

are at present ; and in every period of time those who traded 
with that country carried specie thither and brought none in 
return. 

2. — Of the People of Africa 

The greatest part of the people on the coast of Africa are 
savages and barbarians. The principal reason, I believe, of 
this is, because the small countries capable of being inhabited 
are separated from each other by large and almost uninhabit- 
able tracts of land. They are without industry or arts. They 
have gold in abundance, which they receive immediately from 
the hand of nature. Every civilized state is, therefore, in a 
condition to traffic with them to advantage, by raising their es- 
teem for things of no value, and receiving a very high price in 
return. 

3. — That the Wants of the People in the South are different 

from those of the North 

In Europe there is a kind of balance between the southern 
and northern nations. The first have every convenience of life, 
and few of its wants : the last have many wants, and few con- 
veniences. To one nature has given much, and demands but 
little ; to the other she has given but little, and demands a great 
deal. The equilibrium is maintained by the laziness of the 
southern nations, and by the industry and activity which she 
has given to those in the North. The latter are obliged to un- 
dergo excessive labor, without which they would want every- 
thing, and degenerate into barbarians. This has neutralized 
slavery to the people of the south : as they can easily dispense 
with riches, they can more easily dispense with liberty. But 
the people of the North have need of liberty, for this can best 
procure them the means of satisfying all those wants which 
they have received from nature. The people of the North, 
then, are in a forced state, if they are not either free or bar- 
barians. Almost all the people of the South are, in some meas- 
ure, in a state of violence, if they are not slaves. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 333 

4. — The principal Difference between the Commerce of the 
Ancients and the Moderns 

The world has found itself, from time to time, in different 
situations ; by which the face of commerce has been altered. 
The trade of Europe is, at present, carried on principally from 
the north to the south ; and the difference of climate is the 
cause that the several nations have great occasion for the mer- 
chandise of each other. For example, the liquors of the south, 
which are carried to the north, form a commerce little known 
to the ancients. Thus the burden of vessels, which was former- 
ly computed by measures of corn, is at present determined by 
tuns of liquor. 

The ancient commerce, so far as it is known to us, was car- 
ried on from one port in the Mediterranean to another ; and 
was almost wholly confined to the South. Now the people of 
the same climate, having nearly the same things of their own, 
have not the same need of trading amongst themselves as with 
those of a different climate. The commerce of Europe was, 
therefore, formerly less extended than at present. 

This does not at all contradict what I have said of our com- 
merce to the Indies : for here the prodigious difference of cli- 
mate destroys all relation between their wants and ours. 

5. — Other Differences 

Commerce is sometimes destroyed by conquerors, sometimes 
cramped by monarchs ; it traverses the earth, flies from the 
places where it is oppressed, and stays where it has liberty to 
breathe: it reigns at present where nothing was formerly to 
be seen but deserts, seas, and rocks ; and where it once reigned 
now there are only deserts. 

To see Colchis in its present situation, which is no more than 
a vast forest, where the people are every day diminishing, and 
only defend their liberty to sell themselves by piecemeal to the 
Turks and Persians, one could never imagine that this country 
had ever, in the time of the Romans, been full of cities where 
commerce convened all the nations of the world. We find no 
monument of these facts in the country itself; there are no 
traces of them, except in Plinyd and Strabo.^ 
d Lib. VI. e Lib. XL 



334 MONTESQUIEU 

The history of commerce is that of the communication of 
people. Their numerous defeats, and the flux and reflux of 
populations and devastations, here form the most extraordi- 
nary events. 

6. — Of the Commerce of the Ancients 

The immense treasures of Semiramis,/' which could not be 
acquired in a day, give us reason to believe that the Assyrians 
themselves had pillaged other rich nations, as other nations 
afterwards pillaged them. 

The effect of commerce is riches ; the consequence of riches, 
luxury ; and that of luxury the perfection of arts. We find that 
the arts were carried to great perfection in the time of Semira- 
mis ; g which is a sufficient indication that a considerable com- 
merce was then established. 

In the empires of Asia there was a great commerce of luxury. 
The history of luxury would make a fine part of that of com- 
merce. The luxury of the Persians was that of the Medes, as 
the luxury of the Medes was that of the Assyrians. 

Great revolutions have happened in Asia. The northeast 
parts of Persia, viz., Hyrcania, Margiana, Bactria, etc., were 
formerly full of flourishing cities,^^ which are now no more ; 
and the north of this empire,i that is, the isthmus which sep- 
arates the Caspian and the Euxine Seas, was covered with cities 
and nations, which are now destroyed. 

Eratosthenes and Aristobulus ; learned from Patroclus k that 
the merchandise of India passed by the Oxus into the sea of 
Pontus. Marcus Varro I tells us that at the time when Pompey 
commanded against Mithridates, they were informed that peo- 
ple went in seven days from India to the country of the Bactri- 
ans, and to the River Icarus, which falls into the Oxus ; that 
by this method they were able to bring the merchandise of India 
across the Caspian Sea, and to enter the mouth of Cyrus ; 
whence it was only five days' passage to the Phasis, a river that 
discharges itself into the Euxine Sea. There is no doubt but 
it was by the nations inhabiting these several countries that the 

/ Diodorus, lib. II. k The authority of Patroclus is of 

g Ibid. great weight, as appears from a passage 

h Pliny, lib. VI. cap. xvi., and Strabo, in Strabo, lib. II. 

lib. XT. I Pliny, lib. VI. cap. xvii. See also 

• Strabo, lib. XI. Strabo, lib. XL, upon the passage by 

f Ibid. which the merchandise was conveyed 

from the Phasis to the Cyrus. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



335 



great empires of the Assyrians, Medes, and Persians had com- 
munication with the most distant parts of the east and west. 

An entire stop is now put to this communication. All these 
countries have been laid waste by the Tartars,»J and are still 
infested by this destructive nation. The Oxus no longer runs 
into the Caspian Sea; the Tartars, for some private reasons, 
have changed its course, and it now loses itself in the barren 
sands." 

The Jaxartes, which was formerly a barrier between the 
polite and barbarous nations, has had its course turned in 
the same manner by the Tartars, and it no longer empties itself 
into the sea.o 

Seleucus Nicator formed the project of joining the Euxine 
to the Caspian Sea./' This project, which would have greatly 
facilitated the commerce of those days, vanished at his death.g 
We are not certain it could have been executed in the isthmus 
which separates the two seas. This country is at present very 
little known, it is depopulated, and full of forests ; however, 
water is not wanting, for an infinite number of rivers roll into 
it from Mount Caucasus ; but as this mountain forms the north 
of the isthmus, and extends like two arms r towards the south, 
it would have been a grand obstacle to such an enterprise, es- 
pecially in those times, when they had not the art of making 
sluices. 

It may be imagined that Seleucus would have joined the two 
seas in the very place where Peter I has since joined them ; that 
is, in that neck of land where the Tanais approaches the Volga ; 
but the north of the Caspian Sea was not then discovered. 

While the empires of Asia enjoyed the commerce of luxury, 
the Tyrians had tlie commerce of economy, whicli they ex- 
tended throughout the world. Bochard has employed the first 
book of his " Canaan " in enumerating all the colonies which 
they sent into all the countries bordering upon the sea ; they 
passed the pillars of Hercules, and made establishments on the 
coasts of the ocean.-r 

m There must have been very great the " Collection of Voyages to the 

changes in that country since the time North," vo]. iv. 

of Ptolemy, who gives us an account of o \ am disposed to think that thence 

so many rivers that empty themselves the I^ake Aral was formed, 

into the east side of the Caspian Sea. p Claudius Caesar, in Plin. lib. VI. 

In the Czar's chart we find only the cap. xi. 

river of Astrabat; in that of M. Bathalsi ij Tie was slain by Ptolemy Ceraunus. 

there is none at all. r .Sec Straho, lib, XT. 

n See Jenkinson's account of this, in s They founded Tartcssus, and made 

a settlement at Cadiz. 



336 MONTESQUIEU 

In those times their pilots were obHged to follow the coasts, 
which were, if I may so express myself, their compass. Voy- 
ages were long and painful. The laborious voyage of Ulysses 
has been the fruitful subject of the finest poem in the world, 
next to that which alone has the preference. 

The little knowledge which the greatest part of the world 
had of those who were far distant from them favored the na- 
tions engaged in the economical commerce. They managed 
trade with as much obscurity as they pleased ; they had all the 
advantages which the most intelligent nations could take over 
the most ignorant. 

The Egyptians — a people who by their religion and their 
manners were averse to all communication with strangers — had 
scarcely at that time any foreign trade. They enjoyed a fruitful 
soil and great plenty. Their country was the Japan of those 
times ; it possessed everything within itself. 

So little jealous were these people of commerce, that they 
left that of the Red Sea to all the petty nations that had any 
harbors in it. Here they suffered the Idumeans, the Syrians, 
and the Jews to have fleets. Solomon employed in this naviga- 
tion the Tyrians, who knew those seas.^ 

Josephus « says that this nation, being entirely employed in 
agriculture, knew little of navigation : the Jews, therefore, 
traded only occasionally in the Red Sea. They took from the 
Idumeans Eloth and Eziongeber, from whom they received 
this commerce; they lost these two cities, and with them lost 
this commerce. 

It was not so with the Phoenicians : theirs was not a com- 
merce of luxury ; nor was their trade owing to conquest ; their 
frugality, their abilities, their industry, their perils, and the hard- 
ships they suffered, rendered them necessary to all the nations 
of the world. 

Before Alexander, the people bordering on the Red Sea 
traded only in this sea, and in that of Africa. The astonishment 
which filled the globe at the discovery of the Indian Sea, under 
that conqueror, is a sufificient proof of this. I have observed v 
that bullion was always carried to the Indies, and never any 
brought thence ; now the Jewish fleets, which brought gold 

/I Kinps ix.; 2 Chron. viii. r Chap, i of this book. 

u Against Appian. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 337 

and silver by the way of the Red Sea, returned from Africa, and 
not from the Indies. w 

Besides, this navigation was made on the eastern coast of 
Africa; for the state of navigation at that time is a convincing 
proof that they did not sail to a very distant shore. 

I am not ignorant that the fleets of Solomon and Jehosha- 
phat returned only every three years ; but I do not see that the 
time taken up in the voyage is any proof of the greatness of 
the distance. 

Pliny and Strabo inform us that the junks of India and the 
Red Sea were twenty days in performing a voyage which a 
Greek or Roman vessel Vv^ould accomplish in seven. -t' In this 
proportion, a voyage of one year, made by the fleets of Greece 
or Rome, would take very nearly three when performed by 
those of Solomon. 

Two ships of unequal swiftness do not perform their voyage 
in a time proportionate to their swiftness. Slowness is fre- 
quently the cause of much greater slowness. When it becomes 
necessary to follow the coast, and to be incessantly in a dilTer- 
ent position, when they must wait for a fair wind to get out of 
a gulf, and for another to proceed, a good sailor takes the ad- 
vantage of every favorable moment, while the other still con- 
tinues in a difficult situation, and waits many days for another 
change. 

The slowness of the Indian vessels, which in an equal time 
could make but the third of the way of those of the Greeks and 
Romans, may be explained by what we every day see in our 
modern navigation. The Indian vessels, which were built with 
a kind of sea-rushes, drew less water than those of Greece and 
Rome, which were of wood and joined with iron. 

We may compare these Indian vessels to those at present 
made use of in ports of little depth of water. Such are those of 
'Venice, and even of all Italy in general,!' of the Baltic, and of 
the province of Holland." Their ships, which ought to be able 
to go in and out of port, are built round and broad at the bot- 
tom ; while those of other nations, who have good harbors. 

w The proportion between gold and .r See I'liny, lib. VI. cap. xxii., and 

silver, as settled in Europe, may some- Strabo, lib. aV. 

times render it profitable to take gold y They are mostly shallow; but Sicily 

instead of silver into the East Indies; has excellent ports. 

but the advantage is very trifling. si say the province of Holland; for 



the ports of Zealand are deep enough. 



Vol. I. — 22 



338 MONTESQUIEU 

are formed to sink deep into the water. This mechanism ren- 
ders these last-mentioned vessels able to sail much nearer the 
wind ; while the first can hardly sail, except the wind be nearly 
in the poop. A ship that sinks deep into the water sails towards 
the same side with almost every wind ; this proceeds from 
the resistance which the vessel, while driven by the wind, meets 
with from the water, from which it receives a strong support; 
and from the length of the vessel which presents its side to the 
wind, while, from the form of the helm, the prow is turned to 
the point proposed ; so that she can sail very near the wind, 
or, in other words, very near the point whence the wind blows. 
But when the hull is round and broad at the bottom, and conse- 
quently draws little water, it no longer finds this steady sup- 
port ; the wind drives the vessel, which is incapable of resist- 
ance, and can run them but with a small variation from the 
point opposite to the wind. Whence it follows, that broad-bot- 
tomed vessels are longer in performing voyages. 

I. They lose much time in waiting for the wind, especially 
if they are obliged frequently to change their course. 2. They 
sail much slower, because not having a proper support from a 
depth of water, they cannot carry so much sail. If this be the 
case at a time when the arts are everywhere known, at a time 
when art corrects the defects of nature, and even of art itself; 
if at this time, I say, we find this difference, how great must 
that have been in the navigation of the ancients? 

I cannot yet leave this subject. The Indian vessels were 
small, and those of the Greeks and Romans, if we except those 
machines built for ostentation, much less than ours. Now, the 
smaller the vessel the greater danger it encounters from foul 
weather. A tempest that would swallow up a small vessel 
would only make a large one roll. The more one body sur- 
passes another in size, the more its surface is relatively small. 
Whence it follows, that in a small ship there is a less propor- 
tion, that is, a greater difference in respect to the surface of the 
vessel, compared with the weight or lading she can carry, than 
in a large one. We know that it is a pretty general practice 
to make the weight of the lading equal to that of half the water 
the vessel could contain. Suppose a vessel will contain eight 
hundred tons, her lading then must be four hundred ; and that 
of a vessel which would hold but four hundred tons of water 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 339 

would be two hundred tons. Thus the largeness of the first ship 
will be to the weight she carries as 8 to 4, and that of the second 
as 4 to 2. Let us suppose, then, that the surface of the greater 
is to the surface of the smaller as 8 to 6 ; the surface of the 
latter will be to her weight as 6 to 2,a while the surface of the 
former will be to her weight only as 8 to 4. Therefore, as the 
winds and waves act only upon the surface, the large vessel 
will, by her weight, resist their impetuosity much more than 
the small. 

7. — Of the Commerce of the Greeks 

The first Greeks were all pirates. Minos, who enjoyed the 
empire of the sea, was only more successful, perhaps, than 
others in piracy ; for his maritime dominion extended no 
farther than round his own isle. But when the Greeks became 
a great people, the Athenians obtained the real dominion of the 
sea ; because this trading and victorious nation gave laws to 
the most potent monarch of that time,&amp; and humbled the mari- 
time powers of Syria, of the isle of Cyprus, and Phoenicia. 

But this Athenian lordship of the sea deserves to be more par- 
ticularly mentioned. " Athens," says Xenophon,c " rules the 
sea ; but as the country of Attica is joined to the continent, it 
is ravaged by enemies while the Athenians are ehgaged in dis- 
tant expeditions. Their leaders suffer their lands to be de- 
stroyed, and secure their wealth by sending it to some island. 
The populace, who are not possessed of lands, have no uneasi- 
ness. But if the Athenians inhabited an island, and, beside this, 
enjoyed the empire of the sea, they would, so long as they were 
possessed of these advantages, be able to annoy others, and at 
the same time to be out of all danger of being annoyed." One 
would imagine that Xenophon was speaking of England. 

The Athenians, a people whose heads were filled with ambi- 
tious projects ; the Athenians, who augmented their jealousy 
instead of increasing their influence ; who were more attentive 
to extend their maritime empire than to enjoy it ; whose polit- 
ical government was such that the common people distributed 
the public revenues among themselves, while the rich were in 
a state of oppression ; the Athenians, I say, did not carry on so 

a That is, to compare maKnitudcs of b The Kinp; of Persia, 

the same kinrl, the action or pressure c On the " Athenian Republic." 

of the fluid upon the ship will be to 
the resistance of the same ship as, etc. 



340 MONTESQUIEU 

extensive a commerce as might be expected from the produce 
of their mines, from the muhitude of their slaves, from the num- 
ber of their seamen^ from their influence over the cities of 
Greece, and, above all, from the excellent institutions of Solon. 
Their trade was almost wholly confined to Greece and to the 
Euxine Sea, whence they drew their subsistence. 

Corinth was admirably situated ; it separated two seas, and 
opened and shut the Peloponnesus ; it was the key of Greece, 
and a city of the greatest importance, at a time when the people 
of Greece were a world, and the cities of Greece nations. Its 
trade was more extensive than that of Athens, having a port to 
receive the merchandise of Asia, and another that of Italy ; 
for the great difficulties which attended the doubling Cape 
Malea, where the meeting of opposite winds causes shipwrecks,^ 
induced every one to go to Corinth, and they could even convey 
their vessels over land from one sea to the other. Never was 
there a city in which the works of art were carried to so high a 
degree of perfection. But here religion finished the corrup- 
tion which their opulence began. They erected a temple to 
Venus, in which more than a thousand courtesans were con- 
secrated to that deity ; from this seminary came the greatest 
part of those celebrated beauties whose history Athengeus has 
presumed to commit to writing. 

It seems that in Homer's time the opulence of Greece cen- 
tred in Rhodes, Corinth, and Orchomenus ; " Jupiter," he says, 
" loved the Rhodians, and made them a very wealthy nation."^ 
On Corinth he bestows the epithet of rich./" In like manner, 
when he speaks of cities that have plenty of gold, he mentions 
Orchomenus, to which he joins Thebes in Egypt. Rhodes and 
Corinth preserved their power; but Orchomenus lost hers. 
The situation of Orchomenus in the neighborhood of the Hel- 
lespont, the Propontis, and the Euxine Sea makes us naturally 
imagine that she was indebted for her opulence to a trade along 
that maritime coast, which had given rise to the fable of the 
golden fleece ; and, indeed, the name of Minyeios has been 
given to Orchomenus as weh as to the Argonauts.^ But these 
seas becoming afterwards more frequented, the Greeks planted 
along the coasts a greater number of colonies, which traded 

dSee Strabo, lib. VIII. f Ibid. 

e " Iliad," lib. II. p Strabo, lib. IX. p. 914. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 341 

with the barbarous nations and at the same time preserved an 
intercourse with their mother country. In consequence of this, 
Orchomenus began to dechne till at length it was lost in the 
crowd of the other cities of Greece. 

Before Homer's time the Greeks had scarcely any trade but 
among themselves, and with a few barbarous nations ; in pro- 
portion, however, as they formed new colonies, they extended 
their dominion. Greece was a large peninsula, the capes of 
which seemed to have kept ofif the seas, while its gulfs opened 
on all sides to receive them. If we cast an eye on Greece, we 
shall find, in a pretty compact country, a considerable extent of 
sea-coast. Her innumerable colonies formed an immense circle 
round her ; and there she beheld, in some measure, the whole 
civilized world. Did she penetrate into Sicily and Italy, she 
formed new nations. Did she navigate towards the sea of Pon- 
tus, the coast of Asia Minor, or that of Africa, she acted in the 
same manner. Her cities increased in prosperity in proportion 
as they happened to have new people in their neighborhood. 
And what was extremely beautiful, she was surrounded on 
every side with a prodigious number of islands, drawn, as it 
were, in a line of circumvallation. 

What a source of prosperity must Greece have found in 
those games with which she entertained, in some measure, the 
whole globe ; in those temples, to which all the kings of the 
earth sent their offerings ; in those festivals, at which such a 
concourse of people used to assemble from all parts ; in those 
oracles, to which the attention of all mankind was directed ; 
and, in short, in that exquisite taste for the polite arts, which 
she carried to such a height that to expect ever to surpass her 
would be only betraying our ignorance ! 

8. — Of Alexander: his Conquests 

Four great events happened in the reign of Alexander which 
entirely changed the face of commerce: the taking of Tyre, 
the conquest of Egypt, that likewise of the Indies, and the dis- 
covery of the sea which lies south of that country. 

The Empire of Persia extended to the Indus./t Darius, long 
before Alexander, had sent some vessels, which sailed down this 
river, and passed even into the Red Sea.i How then were the 

h Strabo, lib. XV. i Herodotus, in " Melpomene." 



342 MONTESQUIEU 

Greeks the first who traded with the Indies by the south ? Had 
not the Persians done this before? Did they make no ad- 
vantage of seas which were so near them, of the very seas that 
washed their coasts? Alexander, it is true, conquered the 
Indies ; but was it necessary for him to conquer a country in 
order to trade with it ? This is what I shall now examine. 

Ariana,y which extended from the Persian Gulf as far as the 
Indus, and from the South Sea to the mountains of Paropam- 
isus, depended, indeed, in some measure, on the Empire of 
Persia ; but in the southern part it was barren, scorched, rude, 
and uncultivated./- Tradition relates^ that the armies of 
Semiramis and Cyrus perished in these deserts ; and Alexander, 
who caused his fleet to follow him, could not avoid losing in 
this place a great part of his army. The Persians left the whole 
coast to the Ichthyophagi,wi the Oritse, and other barbarous na- 
tions. Besides, the Persians were no great sailors," and their 
very religion debarred them from entertaining any such notion 
as that of a maritime commerce. The voyage undertaken by 
Darius's direction upon the Indus and the Indian Sea proceeded 
rather from the capriciousness of a prince vainly ambitious of 
showing his power than from any settled regular project. It 
was attended with no consequence either to the advantage of 
commerce or of navigation. They emerged from their igno- 
rance only to plunge into it agam. 

Besides, it was a received opinion^ before the expedition of 
Alexander that the southern parts of India were uninhabitable./* 
This proceeded from a tradition that Semiramis q had brought 
back thence only twenty men, and Cyrus but seven. 

Alexander entered by the north. His design was to march 
towards the east ; but having found a part of the south full of 
great nations, cities, and rivers, he attempted to conquer it, 
and succeeded. 

He then formed a design of uniting the Indies to the Western 
nations by a maritime commerce, as he had already united them 
by the colonies he had established by land. 

i Strabo, lib. XV. this day they have no maritime com- 

k Pliny says, " Ariana regio ambusta merce. Those who take to the sea are 

fervoribus, desertisque circumdata." treated by them as atheists. 

(" Nat. Hist." VI. cap. xxiii.)— Ed. o Strabo, lib. XV. 

/ Strabo, lib. XV. p Herodotus (in " Melpomene ") sajrs 

m Pliny, lib, VI. cap. xxiii.; Strabo, that Darius conquered the Indies; this 

lib. XV. must be understood only to mean Ari- 

n Thy sailed not upon the rivers, lest ana; and even this was only an ideal 

they should defile the elements (Hyde's conquest. 

" Religion of the Persians "). Even to q Strabo, lib XV 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



343 



He ordered a fleet to be built on the Hydaspes, then fell down 
that river, entered the Indus, and sailed even to its mouth. He 
left his army and his fleet at Patala, went himself with a few 
vessels to view the sea, and marked the places where he would 
have ports to be opened and arsenals erected. Upon his return 
from Patala he separated the fleet, and took the route by land, 
for the mutual support of fleet and army. The fleet followed the 
coast from the Indus along the banks of the country of the 
Oritae, of the Ichthyophagi, of Carmania, and Persia. He 
caused wells to be dug, built cities, and would not sufifer the 
Ichthyophagi to live on fish,'' being desirous of having the bor- 
ders of the sea inhabited by civilized nations. Nearchus and 
Onesecritus wrote a journal of this voyage, which was per- 
formed in ten months. They arrived at Susa, where they found 
Alexander, who gave an entertainment to his whole army. 

This prince had founded Alexandria, with a view of securing 
his conquest of Egypt ; this was a key to open it, in the very 
plac^ where the kings his predecessors had a key to shut it ; s 
and he had not the least thought of a commerce of which the 
discovery of the Indian Sea could alone give him the idea. 

It even seems that after his discovery he had no new design 
in regard to Alexandria. He had, indeed, a general scheme of 
opening a trade between the East Indies and the western parts 
of his empire ; but as for the project of conducting this com- 
merce through Egypt, his knowledge was too imperfect to 
be able to form any such design. It is true he had seen the In- 
dus, he had seen the Nile, but he knew nothing of the Arabian 
seas between the two rivers. Scarcely had he returned from 
India when he fitted out new fleets, and navigated on the 
Euleus,' the Tigris, the Euphrates, and the ocean ; he removed 
the cataracts, with which the Persians had encumbered those 
rivers ; and he discovered that the Persian Gulf was a branch 
of the main sea. But as he went to view this sea " in the same 



r This cannot be understood of all the 
Ichthyophagi, who inhabited a coast of 
ten thousand furlongs in extent. How 
was it possible for Alexander to have 
maintained them? How could he com- 
mand their submission? This can be 
only understood of some particular 
tribes. Nearchus, in his book " Rerum 
Indicarum," says that at the extremity 
of this coast, on the side of Persia, he 
had found some people who were less 
Ichthyophagi than the others. I should 



think that Alexander's prohibition re- 
lated to these people, or to some other 
tribe still more bordering on Persia. 

5 Alexandria was founded on a flat 
shore, called Rhacotis, where, in ancient 
times, the kings had kept a garrison to 
prevent all strangers, and more par- 
ticularly the Greeks, from entering the 
country. —Pliny, lib. VI. cap. x. ; Strabo, 
lib. XVIII. 

/ Arrian, " de expedit Alexandrii" 
lib. VII. ^ 

V Ibid. 



344 MONTESQUIEU 

manner as he had done in respect to that of India ; as he 
caused a port to be opened for a thousand ships, and arsenals 
to be erected at Babylon ; as he sent five hundred talents into 
Phoenicia and Syria, to draw mariners into this service whom 
he intended to distribute in the colonies along the coast ; in 
fine, as he caused immense works to be erected on the 
Euphrates, and the other rivers of Assyria, there could be no 
doubt but he designed to carry on the commerce of India by 
the way of Babylon and the Persian Gulf. 

There are some who pretend that Alexander wanted to sub- 
due Arabia,^ and had formed a design to make it the seat of his 
empire : but how could he have pitched upon a place with which 
he was entirely unacquainted ? w Besides, of all countries, this 
would have been the most inconvenient to him ; for it would 
have separated him from the rest of his empire. The Caliphs, 
who made distant conquests, soon withdrew from Arabia to 
reside elsewhere. 

9. — Of the Commerce of the Grecian Kings after the Death of 

Alexander 

At the time when Alexander made the conquest of Egypt, 
they had but a very imperfect idea of the Red Sea, and none at 
all of the ocean, which, joining this sea, on one side washes the 
coast of Africa, and on the other that of Arabia ; nay, they 
thought it impossible to sail round the peninsula of Arabia. 
They who attempted it on each side had relinquished their de- 
sign. " How is it possible," said they,-*^ " to navigate to the 
southern coast of Arabia, when Cambyses's army, which trav- 
ersed it on the north side, almost entirely perished ; and the 
forces which Ptolemy, the son of Lagus, sent to the assistance 
of Seleucus Nicator at Babylon, underwent incredible hard- 
ships, and, upon account of the heat, could march only in the 
night?" 

The Persians were entire strangers to navigation. When 
they had subdued Egypt, they introduced the same spirit into 
that country as prevailed in Persia: hence, so great was the 
supineness of the Persians in this respect, that the Grecian 
kings found them quite strangers, not only to the commerce of 

V Strabo, lib. VI., towards the end. Arabia as an island.— Aristob. in Strabo, 

w Seeing Babylon overflowed, he lib. XVI. 
looked upon the neighboring country of x See the book " Rerum Indicarum." 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 345 

the Tyrians, Idumeans, and the Jews on the ocean, but even 
to the navigation of the Red Sea. I am apt to think that the 
destruction of the first Tyre by Nebuchadnezzar, together with 
the subversion of several petty nations and towns bordering 
on the Red Sea, had obUterated all their former knowledge of 
commerce. 

Egypt, at the time of the Persian monarchy, did not front the 
Red Sea ; it contained only that long narrow neck of land 
which the Nile covers with its inundations, and is inclosed on 
both sides by a chain of mountains.3' They were, therefore, 
under the necessity of making a second discovery of the ocean 
and the Red Sea ; and this discovery engaged the curiosity of 
the Grecian monarchs. 

They ascended the Nile, and hunted after elephants in the 
countries situated between that river and the sea ; by this pro- 
gression they traced the sea-coast ; and as the discoveries were 
madefy the Greeks, the names are all Grecian, and the temples 
are consecrated to Greek divinities..^ 

The Greeks settled in Egypt were able to command a most 
extensive commerce ; they were masters of all the harbors on 
the Red Sea ; Tyre, the rival of every trading nation, was no 
more ; they were not constrained by the ancient superstitions a 
of the country ; in short, Egypt had become the centre of the 
world. 

The kings of Syria left the commerce of the south to those 
of Egypt, and attached themselves only to the northern trade, 
which was carried on by means of the Oxus and the Caspian 
Sea. They then imagined that this sea was part of the North- 
ern Ocean ; b and Alexander, c some time before his death, had 
fitted out a fleet d in order to discover whether it communicated 
with the ocean by the Euxine Sea, or some other eastern sea 
towards India. After him, Seleucus and Antiochus applied 
themselves to make discoveries in it, with particular attention ; 
and with this view they scoured it with their fleets.*? That part 
which Seleucus surveyed was called the Seleucidian Sea ; that 

y Strabo, lib. XVI. s Ibid. c Pliny, lib. II. cap. Ixvii., and lib. VI. 

a These gave them an aversion to cap. ix. and xii.. and Strabo. lib. XL; 

strangers. Arrian, " de expcdit. Alcxandri," lib. 

frit is true that Strabo, Pomponius ITT. p. 74, and lib. V. p. 104. 

Mela, and Pliny believed the Caspian a rf Arrian, " de expedit. Alexandri," lib. 

part of the Northern Ocean, while their VI J. 

predecessors Diodorus, Aristotle, and c Pliny, lib. II. cap. Ixiv. 
Herodotus were correct in their sur- 
mises that it was an isolated sea. — Ed. 



346 MONTESQUIEU 

which Antiochus discovered received the name of the Sea of 
Antiochus. Attentive to the projects they might have formed 
on that side, they neglected the seas on the south ; whether it 
was that the Ptolemies, by means of their fleets on the Red 
Sea, had already become the masters of it, or that they dis- 
covered an invincible aversion in the Persians against engag- 
ing in maritime affairs. The southern coasts of Persia sup- 
plied them with no seamen ; there had been none in those parts, 
except towards the latter end of Alexander's reign. But the 
Egyptian kings, being masters of the Isle of Cyprus, of Phoe- 
nicia, and of a great number of towns on the coast of Asia 
Minor, were possessed of all sorts of conveniences for undertak- 
ing maritime expeditions. They had no occasion to force; 
they had only to follow the genius and bent of their subjects. 

I am surprised, I confess, at the obstinacy with which the 
ancients believed that the Caspian Sea was a part of the ocean. 
The expeditions of Alexander, of the kings of Syria, of the 
Parthians and the Romans, could not make them change their 
sentiments ; notwithstanding these nations described the Cas- 
pian Sea with wonderful exactness : but men are generally 
tenacious of their errors. When only the south of this sea was 
known, it was at first taken for the ocean ; in proportion as they 
advanced along the banks of the northern coast, instead of 
imagining it a great lake, they still believed it to be the ocean, 
that here made a sort of bay: surveying the coast, their dis- 
coveries never went eastward beyond the Jaxartes, nor west- 
ward farther than the extremity of Albania. The sea towards 
the north was shallow, and, of course, very unfit for navigation.^ 
Hence it was that they always looked upon this as the ocean. 

The land army of Alexander had been on the east only as 
far as the Hypanis, which is the last of those rivers that fall into 
the Indus : thus the first trade which the Greeks carried on 
with the Indies was confined to a very small part of the coun- 
try. Seleucus Nicator penetrated as far as the Ganges, and 
thereby discovered the sea into which this river falls, that is to 
say, the Bay of Bengal.gr The moderns discover countries by 
voyages at sea; the ancients discovered seas by conquests at 
land. 

Strabo,^t notwithstanding the testimony of Apollodorus, 

f See the Czar's Chart, g Pliny, lib. VI. cap. xvii. h Lib. XV. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 347 

seems to doubt whether the Grecian kings of Bactria proceeded 
farther than Seleucus and Alexander.! Were it even true that 
they went no farther to the east than Seleucus, yet they went 
farther towards the south ; they discovered Siger, and the ports 
on the coast of Malabar, which gave rise to the navigation I 
am going to mention.;' 

Pliny informs us that the navigation of the Indies was suc- 
cessively carried on in three different ways.^ At first they sailed 
from the Cape of Siagre to the island of Patalena, which is at 
the mouth of the Indus. This we find was the course that Alex- 
ander's fleet steered to the Indies. They took afterwards a 
shorter and more certain course, by sailing from the same cape 
or promontory to Siger : I this can be no other than the kingdom 
of Siger mentioned by Strabo,?" and discovered by the Grecian 
kings of Bactria. Pliny, by saying that this way was shorter 
thar* the other, can mean only that the voyage was made in less 
time : for, as Siger was discovered by the kings of Bactria, it 
must have been farther than the Indus : by this passage they 
must, therefore, have avoided the winding of certain coasts, 
and taken advantage of particular winds. The merchants at 
last took a third way ; they sailed to Canes, or Ocelis, ports 
situated at the entrance of the Red Sea ; whence by a west wind 
they arrived at Muziris, the first staple town of the Indies, and 
thence to the other ports. Here we see that instead of sailing 
to the mouth of the Red Sea as far as Siagre, by coasting 
Arabia Felix to the northeast, they steered directly from west 
to east, from one side to the other, by means of the monsoons, 
w'hose regular course they discovered by sailing in these lati- 
tudes. The ancients never lost sight of the coasts, except when 
they took advantage of these and the trade winds, which were 
to them a kind of compass." 

Pliny says that they set sail for the Indies in the middle ol 
summer and returned towards the end of December, or in the 
beginning of January. This is entirely conformable to our 
naval journals. In that part of the Indian Ocean which is be- 
tween the Peninsula of Africa, and that on this side the Ganges, 

f Apollonius Adrumatinus in Strabo, »i Lib. XI. " Sigertidis regnum." 

lib. TI. ft The monsoons blow part of the year 

y The Macedonians of Bactria, India, from one quarter, and part from an- 

and Ariana, having separated themselves other; the trade winds blow the whole 

from .Syria, formed a great state. year round from the same quarter. 

k Lib. Vi. cap. xxiii. o Lib. VI. cap. xxiii. 

/ Pliny, lib. Vl. cap. xxiii. 



348 MONTESQUIEU 

there are two monsoons ; the first, during which the winds blow 
from west to east, begins in the month of August or September ; 
and the second, during which the wind is in the east, begins in 
January. Thus we set sail from Africa for Malabar at the sea- 
son of the year that Ptolemy's fleet used to put to sea thence ; 
and we return too at the same time as they. 

Alexander's fleet was seven months in sailing from Patala to 
Susa. It set out in the month of July, that is, at a season when 
no ship dare now put to sea to return from the Indies. Be- 
tween these two monsoons there is an interval, during which 
the winds vary ; when a north wind, meeting with the common 
winds, raises, especially near the coasts, the most terrible tem- 
pests. These continue during the months of June, July, and 
August. Alexander's fleet, therefore, setting sail from Patala 
in the month of July, must have been exposed to many storms, 
and the voyage must have been long, because they sailed 
against the monsoon. 

Pliny says that they set out for the Indies at the end of sum- 
mer ; thus they spent the time proper for taking advantage of 
the monsoon in their passage from Alexandria to the Red Sea. 

Observe here, I pray, how navigation has, little by little, ar- 
rived at perfection. Darius's fleet was two years and a half 
in falling down the Indus and going to the Red Sea.P After- 
wards the fleet of Alexander,? descending" the Indus, arrived at 
Susa in ten months, having sailed three months on the Indus, 
and seven on the Indian Ocean ; at last the passage from the 
coast of Malabar to the Red Sea was made in forty days.^ 

Strabo,^ who accounts for their ignorance of the countries 
between the Hypanis and the Ganges, says there were very few 
of those who sailed from Egypt to the Indies that ever pro- 
ceeded so far as the Ganges. Their fleets, in fact, never went 
thither : they sailed with the western monsoons from the mouth 
of the Red Sea to the coast of Malabar. They cast anchor in 
the ports along that coast, and never attempted to get round the 
peninsula on this side the Ganges by Cape Comorin and the 
coast of Coromandel. The plan of navigation laid down by the 
kings of Egypt and the Romans was to set out and return the 
same year.' 

p Herodotus, " Melpomene." s Lib. XV. 

Q Pliny, lib. VI. cap. xxiii. t Pliny, lib. VI. cap. xxiil. 

r Ibid. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 349 

Thus it is demonstrable that the commerce of the Greeks 
and Romans to the Indies was much less extensive than ours. 
We know immense countries, which to them were entirely un- 
known ; we traffic with all the Indian nations ; we even man- 
age their trade and carry on their commerce. 

But this commerce of the ancients was carried on with far 
greater facility than ours. And if the moderns were to trade 
only with the coast of Guzerat and Malabar, and, without seek- 
ing for the southern isles, were satisfied with what these island- 
ers brought them, they would certainly prefer the way of Egypt 
to that of the Cape of Good Hope. Strabo informs us u that 
they traded thus with the people of Taprobane. 

10. — Of the Circuit of Africa 

We find from history that before the discovery of the mar- 
iner's compass four attempts were made to sail round the 
coast of Africa. The Phoenicians sent by Necho v and Eu- 
doxus,«' flying from the wrath of Ptolemy Lathyrus, set out 
from the Red Sea, and succeeded. Sataspes -^ sent by Xerxes, 
and Hanno by the Carthaginians, set out from the Pillars of 
Hercules, and failed in the attempt. 

The capital point in surrounding Africa was to discover and 
double the Cape of Good Hope. Those who set out from the 
Red Sea found this cape nearer by half, than it would have been 
in setting out from the Mediterranean. The shore from the 
Red Sea is not so shallow as that from the cape to Hercules' 
Pillars.y The discovery of the cape by Hercules's Pillars was 
owing to the invention of the compass, which permitted them 
to leave the coast of Africa, and to launch out into the vast 
ocean, in order to sail towards the island of St. Helena, or 
towards the coast of Brazil." It was, therefore, possible for them 
to sail from the Red Sea into the Mediterranean, but not to set 
out from the Mediterranean to return by the Red Sea. 

Thus, without making this grand circuit, after which they 
could hardly hope to return, it was most natural to trade to the 

u Lib. XV. s In the months of October, Novem- 

V He was desirous of conquering it. — her. neccmher, and January the wind 

Herodotus, lib. TV. in the .\tlantic Ocean is found to blow 

w Pliny, lib. 11. cap. Ixvii.; Pomponius northeast; our ships therefore cross the 

Mela, lib. III. cap. ix. line, and to avoid the wind, which is 

X TIerodotus, in " Melpomene." there generally cast, they direct their 

y Add to this what I shall say in chap. course to the south; or else they enter 

II of this book on the navigation of into the torrid zone, in those places 

Hanno. where the wind is west. 



350 MONTESQUIEU 

east of Africa by the Red Sea, and to the western coast by Her- 
cules' Pillars. 

The Grecian kings of Egypt discovered at first, in the Red 
Sea, that part of the coast of Africa which extends from the 
bottom of the gulf, where stands the town of Heroum, as far as 
Dira, that is, to the strait now known by the name of Babel- 
mandel. Thence to the promontory of Aromatia, situate at 
the entrance of the Red Sea,o the coast had never been surveyed 
by navigators : and this is evident from what Artemidorus tells 
us,^ that they were acquainted with the places on that coast, 
but knew not their distances : the reason of which is, they suc- 
cessively gained a knowledge of those ports by land, without 
sailing from one to the other. 

Beyond this promontory, at which the coast along the ocean 
commenced, they knew nothing, as we learn from Eratosthenes 
and Artemidorus. c 

Such was the knowledge they had of the coasts of Africa in 
Strabo's time, that is, in the reign of Augustus. But after the 
prince's decease, the Romans found out the two capes Raptum 
and Prassum, of which Strabo makes no mention, because they 
had not as yet been discovered. It is plain that both those 
names are of Roman origin. 

Ptolemy, the geographer, flourished under Adrian and An- 
toninus Pius ; and the author of the Periplus of the Red Sea, 
whoever he was, lived a little after. Yet the former limits 
known Africa to Cape Prassum,^ which is in about the 14th 
degree of south latitude ; while the author of the Periplus c con- 
fines it to Cape Raptum, which is nearly in the loth degree of 
the same latitude. In all likelihood the latter took his limit 
from a place then frequented, and Ptolemy his from a place with 
which there was no longer any communication. 

What confirms me in this notion is that the people about 
Cape Prassum were Anthropophagi.^ Ptolemy takes notice g 
of a great number of places between the port or emporium 
Aromatum and Cape Raptum, but leaves an entire blank be- 

a The sea to which we give this name called Austricornu; and Eratosthenes, 

was called by the ancients the Gulf of Cinnamomiferam. 

Arabia; the name of Red Sea they gave rf Lib. I. cap. vii.; lib. IV. cap. ix. 

to that part of the ocean which borders table 4 of Africa. 

on this gulf. c This Periplus is attributed to Arrian. 

b Strabo, lib. XVI. f Ptol. lib. IV. cap. ix. 

c Ibid. Artemidorus settled the bor- g Lib. IV. cap. vii. and viii. 
ders of the known coast at the place 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 351 

tween Capes Raptum and Prassum. The great profits of the 
East India trade must have occasioned a neglect of that of 
Africa. In fine, the Romans never had any settled navigation ; 
they had discovered these several ports by land expeditions, and 
by means of ships driven on that coast ; and as at present we 
are well acquainted with the maritime parts of Africa, but know 
very little of the inland country, the ancients, on the contrary, 
had a very good knowledge of the inland parts, but were al- 
most strangers to the coasts./^ 

I said that the Phoenicians sent by Necho and Eudoxus un- 
der Ptolemy Lathyrus had made the circuit of Africa ; but at 
the time of Ptolemy, the geographer, those two voyages must 
have been looked upon as fabulous, since he places after J the 
Sin«s Magnus, which I apprehend to be the Gulf of Siam, an 
unknown country, extending from Asia to Africa, and terminat- 
ing at Cape Prassum, so that the Indian Ocean would have 
been no more than a lake. The ancients who discovered the 
Indies towards the north, advancing eastward, placed this un- 
known country to the south, 

II. — Of Carthage and Marseilles 

The law of nations which prevailed at Carthage was very ex- 
traordinary : all strangers who traded to Sardinia and towards 
Hercules' Pillars this haughty republic sentenced to be 
drowned. Her civil polity was equally surprising; she for- 
bade the Sardinians to cultivate their lands, upon pain of death. 
She increased her power by her riches, and afterwards her 
riches by her power. Being mistress of the coasts of Africa, 
which are washed by the Mediterranean, she extended herself 
along the ocean. Hanno, by order of the Senate of Carthage, 
distributed thirty thousand Carthaginians from Hercules' Pil- 
lars as far as Cerne. This place, he says, is as distant from 
Hercules' Pillars as the latter from Carthage. This situation is 
extremely remarkable. It lets us see that Hanno limited his 
settlements to the 25th degree of north latitude ; that is, to two 
or three degrees south of the Canaries. 

Ii Sec what exact descriptions Slrabo world had wapcd with the people of 
and Ptolemy have piven us of the dif- Africa, to the alliances they had con- 
ferent parts of Africa. Their knowlcdpc tracted, and to the trade they had car- 
was owinp: to the several wars which ried on with those countries, 
the two most powerful nations in the • Lib. VII. cap. iii. 



352 MONTESQUIEU 

Hanno being at Cerne undertook another voyage, with a 
view of making further discoveries towards the south. He 
took but little notice of the continent. He followed the coast 
for twenty-six days, when he was obliged to return for want of 
provisions. The Carthaginians, it seems, made no use of this 
second enterprise. Scylax says ; that the sea is not navigable 
beyond Cerne, because it is shallow, full of mud and sea-weeds : k 
and, in fact, there are many of these in those latitudes.' The 
Carthaginian merchants mentioned by Scylax might find ob- 
stacles which Hanno, who had sixty vessels of fifty oars each, 
had surmounted. Difficulties are at most but relative ; be- 
sides, we ought not to confound an enterprise in which bravery 
and resolution must be exerted with things that require no ex- 
traordinary conduct. 

The relation of Hanno's voyage is a fine fragment of an- 
tiquity. It was written by the very man that performed it. 

His recital is not mingled with ostentation. Great com- 
manders write their actions with simplicity ; because they re- 
ceive more glory from facts than from words. 

The style is agreeable to the subject ; he deals not in the 
marvellous. All he says of the climate, of the soil, the behavior, 
the manners of the inhabitants, correspond with what is every 
day seen on this coast of Africa ; one would imagine it the 
journal of a modern sailor. 

He observed from his fleet that in the daytime there was a 
prodigious silence on the continent, that in the night he heard 
the sound of various musical instruments, and that fires might 
then be everywhere seen, some larger than others.'" Our rela- 
tions are conformable to this ; it has been discovered that in 
the day the savages retire into the forests to avoid the heat 
of the sun, that they light up great fires in the night to dis- 
perse the beasts of prey, and that they are passionately fond of 
music and dancing. 

The same writer describes a volcano with all the phenomena 
of Vesuvius ; and relates that he captured two hairy women, 

j See his " Periplus," under the article weed covers the surface of the water in 

of Carthage. such a manner as to be scarcely per- 

k See Herodotus, in " Melpomene," ceived, and ships can only pass through 

on the obstacles which Sataspes en- it with a stiff gale, 

countered. m Pliny tells us the same thing, speak- 

/ See the charts and relations in the ing of Mount Atlas :_ " Noctibus rnicare 

first volume of " Voyages that con- crebris ignibus, tibiarum cantu timpa- 

tributed to the establishment of an East norumque sonitu strepere, neminem in- 

India company," part I. p. 201. This terdiu cerni.' 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 353 

who chose to die rather than follow the Carthaginians, and 
whose skins he carried to Carthage. This has been found not 
void of probability. 

This narration is so much the more valuable as it is a monu- 
ment of Punic antiquity ; and hence alone it has been regarded 
as fabulous. For the Romans retained their hatred of the 
Carthaginians, even after they had destroyed them. But it was 
victory alone that decided whether we ought to say the Punic 
or the Roman faith. 

Some moderns n have imbibed these prejudices. What has 
become, say they, of the cities described by Hanno, of which 
even in Pliny's time there remained no vestiges ? But it would 
have been a wonder, indeed, if any such vestiges had remained. 
Was it a Corinth or Athens that Hanno built on those coasts ? 
He left Carthaginian families in such places as were most com- 
modious for trade, and secured them as well as his hurry would 
permit against savages and wild beasts. The calamities of the 
Carthaginians put a period to the navigation of Africa ; these 
families must necessarily then either perish or become savages. 
Besides, were the ruins of these cities even still in being, who 
is it that would venture into the woods and marshes to make 
the discovery ? We find, however, in Scylax and Polybius that 
the Carthaginians had considerable settlements on those coasts. 
These are the vestiges of the cities of Hanno ; there are no 
others, from the same reason that there are no others of Car- 
thage itself. 

The Carthaginians were in the high road to wealth ; and had 
they gone so far as four degrees of north latitude, and fifteen of 
longitude, they would have discovered the Gold Coast. They 
would then have had a trade of much greater importance than 
that which is carried on at present on that coast, at a time when 
America seems to have degraded the riches of all other coun- 
tries. They would there have found treasures of which they 
could never have been deprived by the Romans. 

Very surprising things have been said of the riches of Spain. 
If we may believe Aristotle," the Phoenicians who arrived at 
Tartessus found so much silver there that their ships could not 
hold it all ; and they made of this metal their meanest utensils. 

»i ATr. Dr)t]well. See his Dissertation n " Of Wonderful Things." 

on Hanno's " Periplus." 

Vol.. T. — 23 



354 MONTESQUIEU 

The Carthaginians,/' according to Diodorus,? found so much 
gold and silver in the Pyrenean mountains, that they adorned 
the anchors of their ships with it. But no foundation can be 
built on such popular reports. Let us, therefore, examine the 
facts themselves. 

We find in a fragment of Polybius, cited by Strabo,** that 
the silver mines at the source of the river Baetis, in which forty 
thousand men were employed, produced to the Romans twen- 
ty-five thousand drachmas a day, that is, about five million 
livres a year, at fifty livres to the mark. The mountains that 
contained these mines were called the Silver Mountains : ^ which 
shows they were the Potosi of those times. At present, the 
mines of Hanover do not employ a fourth part of the workmen, 
and yet they yield more. But as the Romans had not many 
copper mines, and but few of silver ; and as the Greeks knew 
none but the Attic mines, which were of little value, they might 
well be astonished at their abundance. 

In the war that broke out for the succession of Spain, a man 
called the Marquis of Rhodes, of whom it was said that he was 
ruined in gold mines and enriched in hospitals,^ proposed to 
the Court of France to open the Pyrenean mines. He alleged 
the example of the Tyrians, the Carthaginians, and the Romans. 
He v^as permitted to search, but sought in vain ; he still alleged, 
and found nothing. 

The Carthaginians, being masters of the gold and silver trade, 
were willing to be so of the lead and pewter. These metals 
were carried by land from the ports of Gaul upon the ocean to 
those of the Mediterranean. The Carthaginians were desirous 
of receiving them at the first hand ; they sent Himilco to make 
a settlement in the isles called Cassiterides," which are imagined 
to be those of Scilly. 

These voyages from Bsetica into England have made some 
persons imagine that the Carthaginians knew the compass : but 
it is very certain that they followed the coasts. There needs no 
other proof than Himilco's being four months in sailing from 
the mouth of the Baetis to England ; besides, the famous piece 
of history of the Carthaginian v pilot who, being followed by a 

p Diodorus speaks of the Phoenicians 5 " Mons Argentarius." 

in this relation, and not of the Cartha- / He had some share in their manage- 

ginians.— Ed. ment. 

a \.\h. III. tt See Festus Avienus. 

• Lib. VI. V Strabo, lib. III., towards the end 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



355 



Roman vessel, ran aground, that he might not show her the 
way to Englanci,w plainly intimates that those vessels were very 
near the shore when they fell in with each other. 

The ancients might have performed voyages that would make 
one imagine they had the compass, though they had not. If a 
pilot was far from land, and during his voyage had such serene 
weather that in the night he could always see a polar star-f 
and in the day the rising and setting of the sun, it is certain he 
might regulate his course as well as we do now by the compass : 
but this must be a fortuitous case, and not a regular method of 
navigation. 

We see in the treaty which put an end to the first Punic war 
that Carthage was principally attentive to preserve the empire 
of the sea, and Rome that of the land. Hanno,^ in his nego- 
tiation with the Romans, declared that they should not be suf- 
fered even to wash their hands in the sea of Sicily ; they were 
not permitted to sail beyond the promontoriiini pnlchrum; they 
were forbidden to trade in Sicily, Sardinia, and Africa, except at 
Carthage : " an exception that proves there was no design to 
favor them in their trade with that city. 

In early times there had been very great wars between Car- 
thage and Marseilles a on the subject of fishing. After the 
peace they entered jointly into economical commerce. Mar- 
seilles at length grew jealous, especially as, being equal to her 
rival in industry, she had become inferior to her in power. This 
is the motive of her great fidelity to the Romans. The war be- 
tween the latter and the Carthaginians in Spain was a source of 
riches to Marseilles, which had now become their magazine. 
The ruin of Carthage and Corinth still increased the glory of 
Marseilles, and had it not been for the civil wars, in which this 
republic ought on no account to have engaged, she would have 
been happy under the protection of the Romans, who were not 
the least jealous of her commerce. 

w He was rewarded by the senate of y Frenshemius's Supplement to Livy, 

Carthage. 2d Decad. 

X Montesquieu has been found fault s In the parts subject to the Cartha- 

with in this construction, as though he ginians. 

were giving the imnression that there a Justin, lib. XLIII. cap. v. 
was more than one North Star. — Ed. 



356 



MONTESQUIEU 



12. — The Isle of Delos — Mithridates 

Upon the destruction of Corinth by the Romans, the mer- 
chants retired to Delos, an island which from religious con- 
siderations was looked upon as a place of safety : b besides, it 
was extremely well situated for the commerce of Italy and Asia, 
which, since the reduction of Africa and the weakening of 
Greece, had grown more important. 

From the earliest times the Greeks, as we have already ob- 
served, sent colonies to Propontis and to the Euxine Sea — 
colonies which retained their laws and liberties under the Per- 
sians. Alexander, having undertaken his expedition against 
the barbarians only, did not molest these people.^ Neither does 
it appear that the kings of Pontus, who were masters of many 
of those colonies, ever deprived them of their own civil gov- 
ernment. c^ 

The power of those kings increased as soon as they sub- 
dued those cities.^ Mithridates found himself able to hire 
troops on every side ; to repair his frequent losses ; to have a 
multitude of workmen, ships, and military machines ; to pro- 
cure himself allies ; to bribe those of the Romans, and even the 
Romans themselves ; to keep the barbarians of Asia and Eu- 
rope in his pay ; f to continue the war for many years, and, of 
course, to discipline his troops, he found himself able to train 
them to arms, to instruct them in the military art of the Ro- 
mans,^ and to form considerable bodies out of their deserters ; 
in a word, he found himself able to sustain great losses, and to 
be frequently defeated, without being ruined ; h neither would 
he have been ruined if the voluptuous and barbarous king had 
not destroyed, in his prosperous days, what had been done by 
the great prince in times of adversity. 

Thus it was that when the Romans had arrived at their high- 
est pitch of grandeur, and seemed to have nothing to appre- 



b See Strabo, lib. X. 

c He confirmed the liberty of the city 
of Amisus, an Athenian colony which 
had enjoyed a popular government, even 
under the kings of Persia. Lucullus 
having taken Sinone and Amisus, re- 
stored them to their liberty, and recalled 
the inhabitants, who had fled on board 
their ships. 

d See what Appian writes concerning 
the Phanagoreans, the Amisians, and 
the Synopians, in his treatise of the 
Mithridatic war. 



e See Appian, in regard to the im- 
mense treasures which Mithridates em- 
ployed in his wars, those which he had 
buried, those which he frequently lost 
by the treachery of his own people, and 
those which were found after his death. 

/ See Appian on the Mithridatic war. 

g Ibid. 

li He lost at one time 170,000 men, yet 
he soon recruited his armies. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 357 

hend but from the ambition of their own subjects, Mithridates 
once more ventured to contest the mighty point, which the 
overthrows of PhiHp, of Antiochus, and of Perseus had already 
decided. Never was there a more destructive war : the two 
contending parties, being possessed of great power, and re- 
ceiving aUernate advantages, the inhabitants of Greece and of 
Asia fell a sacrifice in the quarrel, either as foes, or as friends of 
Mithridates. Delos was involved in the general fatality, and 
commerce failed on every side : which was a necessary conse- 
quence, the people themselves being destroyed. 

The Romans, in pursuance of a system of which I have 
spoken elsewhere,* acting as destroyers, that they might not 
appear as conquerors, demolished Carthage and Corinth ; a 
practice by which they would have ruined themselves had they 
not subdued the world. When the kings of Pontus became 
masters of the Greek colonies on the Euxine Sea, they took care 
not to destroy what was to be the foundation of their own gran- 
deur. 

13. — Of the Genius of the Romans as ^0 Maritime Affairs 

The Romans laid no stress on anything but their land forces, 
who were disciplined to stand firm, to fight on one spot, and 
there bravely to die. They could not like the practice of sea- 
men, who first ofifer to fight, then fly, then return, constantly 
avoid danger, often make use of stratagem, and seldom of 
force. This was not suitable to the genius of the Greeks,; much 
less to that of the Romans. 

They destined, therefore, to the sea only those citizens who 
were not considerable enough to have a place in their legions.^ 
Their marines were commonly freed-men. 

At this time we have neither the same esteem for land forces 
nor the same contempt for those of the sea. In the former, 
art has decreased ; / in the latter, it has augmented : "' now 
things are generally esteemed in proportion to the degree of 
ability requisite to discharge them. 

»■ In the " Considerations on the k Polybius, lib. V. 

Causes of the Rise and Declension of / See the " Considerations on the 

the Roman ( Irnndeur." Causes of the Rise and Declension of 

y As I'lato has observed, lib. IV., of the Roman Grandeur." 

Laws. m Ibid. 



358 MONTESQUIEU 

J4. — Of the Genius of the Romans with respect to Commerce 

The Romans were never distinguished by a jealousy for 
trade. They attacked Carthage as a rival, not as a commercial 
nation. They favored trading cities that were not subject to 
them. Thus they increased the power of Marseilles by the 
cession of a large territory. They were vastly afraid of bar- 
barians, but had not the least apprehension from a trading peo- 
ple. Their genius, their glory, their military education, and the 
very form of their government estranged them from com- 
merce. 

In the city, they were employed only about war, elections, 
factions, and law-suits ; in the country, about agriculture ; and 
as for the provinces, a severe and tyrannical government was 
incompatible with commerce. 

But their political constitution was not more opposed to trade 
than their law of nations. "The people," says Pomponius, 
the civilian,^ " with whom we have neither friendship nor hos- 
pitality nor alliance, are not our enemies ; however, if anything 
belonging to us falls into their hands, they are the proprietors 
of it ; freemen become their slaves ; and they are upon the same 
terms with respect to us." 

Their civil law was not less oppressive. The law of Con- 
stantinc^ after having stigmatized as bastards the children of 
a mean rank who had been married to those of a superior sta- 
tion, confounds women who retail merchandise with slaves, 
with the mistresses of taverns, with actresses, with the daugh- 
ters of those who keep pubHc stews, or who had been con- 
demned to fight in the amphitheatre: this had its origin in 
the ancient institutions of the Romans. 

I am not ignorant that men prepossessed with these two 
ideas, that commerce is of the greatest service to a state, and 
that the Romans had the best regulated government in the 
world, have believed that these people greatly honored and 
encouraged commerce ; but the truth is, they seldom troubled 
their heads about it. 

fi Leg. V. flf. " de Captivis." o Quae mercimonHs pubHce prnefuit.— 

Leg. V. cod. " de natural, liberis." 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 359 

15. — Of the Commerce of the Romans zvith the Barbarians 
The Romans having erected a vast empire in Europe, Asia, 
and Africa, the weakness of the people and the tyranny of their 
laws united all the parts of this immense body. The Roman 
policy was then to avoid all communication with those nations 
whom they had not subdued : the fear of carrying to them the 
art of conquering made them neglect the art of enriching them- 
selves. They made laws to hinder all commerce with bar- 
barians. " Let nobody," said Valens and Gratian,/' " send 
wine, oil, or other liquors to the barbarians, though it be only 
for them to taste." " Let no one carry gold to them," add 
Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius ; 9 " rather, if they have 
any, let our subjects deprive them of it by stratagem." The 
exportation of iron was prohibited on pain of death. 

Domitian, a prince of great timidity, ordered the vines in 
Gaul to be pulled up,^ from fear, no doubt, lest their wines 
should draw thither the barbarians. Probus and Julian, who 
had no such fears, gave orders for their being planted again. 

I am sensible that upon the declension of the Roman Em- 
pire the barbarians obliged the Romans to establish staple 
towns, and to trade with them.^ But even this is a proof that 
the minds of the Romans were averse to commerce.^ 

16. — Of the Commerce of the Romans with Arabia and the 

Indies 

The trade to Arabia Felix, and that to the Indies, were the 
two branches, and almost the only ones, of their foreign com- 
merce. The Arabians were possessed of immense riches, which 
they found in their seas and forests ; and as they sold much and 
purchased little, they drew to themselves the gold and silver 
of the Romans." Augustus,z' being w-ell apprised of that opu- 
lence, resolved they should be either his friends or his enemies. 
With this view he sent /Elius Gallus from Egypt into Arabia. 
This commander found the people indolent, peaceable, and un- 
skilled in war. He fought battles, laid sieges to towns, and 
lost but seven of his men by the sword ; but the perfidy of his 

p Leg. ad barbaricum cod. qua: res / Sec tlie " Considerations on the 

exportari non debcant. Causes of the Rise and Declension of 

Q Leg. 2 cod. de commcrc. et_ mercator. the Roman (Irandeur." 

r Leff. 2 qu.-e res exportari non de- « Tliny, b'b. VI. cap. xxviii., and 

beant, and Procopius, " War of the Strabo, lib. XVI. 

Persians," book I. v Ibid. 

s See the Chronicles of Eusebius and 
Cedrenus. 



360 MONTESQUIEU 

guides, long marches, the climate, want of provisions, distem- 
pers, and ill conduct, caused the ruin of his army. 

He was, therefore, obliged to be content with trading to 
Arabia, in the same manner as other nations ; that is, with 
giving them gold and silver in exchange for their commodi- 
ties. The Europeans trade with them still in the same manner ; 
the caravans of Aleppo and the royal vessel of Suez carry 
thither immense sums.w 

Nature had formed the Arabs for commerce, not for war ; 
but when those quiet people came to be near neighbors to the 
Parthians and the Romans, they acted as auxiliaries to both 
nations, ^lius Gallus found them a trading people; Ma- 
homet happened to find them trained to war ; he inspired them 
with enthusiasm, which led them to glory and conquest. 

The commerce of the Romans to the Indies was very con- 
siderable. Strabo ^ had been informed in Egypt that they em- 
ployed in this navigation one hundred and twenty vessels ; this 
commerce was carried on entirely with bullion. They sent 
thither annually fifty millions of sesterces. Pliny y says that 
the merchandise brought thence was sold at Rome at a centuple 
cent, profit. He speaks, I believe, too generally ; if this trade 
had been so vastly profitable, everybody would have been will- 
ing to engage in it, and then it would have been at an end. 

It will admit of a question, whether the trade to Arabia and 
the Indies was of any advantage to the Romans. They were 
obliged to export their bullion thither, though they had not, 
like us, the resource of America, which supplies what we send 
away. I am persuaded that one of the reasons of their increas- 
ing the value of their specie by establishing base coin was the 
scarcity of silver, owing to the continual exportation of it to 
the Indies : and though the commodities of this country were 
sold at Rome at a centuple rate, this profit of the Romans, 
being obtained from the Romans themselves, could not enrich 
the empire. 

It may be alleged, on the other hand, that this commerce in- 
creased the Roman navigation, and, of course, their power; 
that new merchandise augmented their inland trade, gave en- 

w The caravans of Aleppo and Suez sel of Suez carries thither also two 

carry thither annually to the value of millions, 
about two millions of livres, and as x Lib. II. p. 81. 

much more clandestinely; the royal ves- y Lib. VI. cap. xxiii. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 361 

couragement to the arts, and employment to the industrious ; 
that the number of subjects multiphed in proportion to the new 
means of support ; that this new commerce was productive of 
luxury, which I have proved to be as favorable to a monarch- 
ical government as fatal to a commonwealth ; that this estab- 
lishment was of the same date as the fall of their republic ; that 
the luxury of Rome had become necessary ; and that it was 
extremely proper that a city which had accumulated all the 
wealtli of the universe should refund it by its luxury. 

Strabo says a that the Romans carried on a far more exten- 
sive commerce with the Indies than the kings of Egypt ; but it 
is very extraordinary that those people who were so little ac- 
quainted with commerce should have paid more attention to 
that of India than the Egyptian kings, whose dominions lay 
so conveniently for it. The reason of this must be explained. 

After the death of Alexander, the kings of Egypt established 
a maritime commerce with the Indies ; while the kings of 
Syria, who were possessed of the more eastern provinces, and 
consequently of the Indies, maintained that commerce of which 
we have taken notice in the sixth chapter, which was carried 
on partly by land, and partly by rivers, and had been further 
facilitated by means of the Macedonian colonies ; insomuch 
that Europe had communication with the Indies both by Egypt 
and by Syria. The dismembering of the latter kingdom, 
whence was formed that of Bactriana, did not prove in any way 
prejudicial to this commerce. Marinus the Tyrian, quoted by 
Ptolemy, &amp; mentions the discoveries made in India by means 
of some Macedonian merchants, who found out new roads, 
which had been unknown to kings in their military expeditions. 
We find in Ptolemy,c that they went from Peter's tower,rf as 
far as Sera ; and the discovery made by mercantile people of so 
distant a mart, situated in the northeast part of China, was a 
kind of prodigy. Hence, under the kings of Syria and Bac- 
triana, merchandise was conveyed to the west from the south- 
ern parts of India, by the River Indus, the Oxus, and the Cas- 
pian Sea ; while those of the more eastern and northern parts 
were transported from Sera, Peter's tower, and other staples, 

a He says, in his 12th book, that the b IJb. T. cap. ii. 

Romans employed a hundred and c I-ib. T. cap. xiii. 

twenty ships in that trade; and in the rf Oiir best maps place Peter's tower 

17th book, that the Grecian kings in the hundredth degree of longitude, 

scarcely employed twenty. and about the fortieth of latitude. 



362 MONTESQUIEU 

as far as the Euphrates. Those merchants directed their route 
nearly by the fortieth degree of north latitude, through coun- 
tries situated to the west of China, more civilized at that time 
than at present, because they had not as yet been infested by 
the Tartars. 

Now while the Syrian Empire was extending its trade to such 
a distance by land, Egypt did not greatly enlarge its maritime 
commerce. 

The Parthians soon after appeared, and founded their em- 
pire ; and when Egypt fell under the power of the Romans, this 
empire was at its height, and had received its whole extension. 

The Romans and Parthians were two rival nations, that 
fought not for dominion but for their very existence. Be- 
tween the two empires deserts were formed and armies were 
always stationed on the frontiers ; so that instead of there being 
any commerce, there was not so much as communication be- 
tween them. Ambition, jealousy, religion, national antipathy, 
and difference of manners completed the separation. Thus the 
trade from east to west, which had formerly so many channels, 
was reduced to one ; and Alexandria becoming the only staple, 
the trade to this city was immensely enlarged. 

We shall say but one word of their inland trade. Its principal 
branch was the corn brought to Rome for the subsistence of 
^he people ; but this was rather a political affair than a point 
of commerce. On this account the sailors were favored with 
some privileges, because the safety of the empire depended on 
their vigilance.^ 

17. — Of Commerce after the Destruction of the Western 

Empire 

After the invasion of the Roman Empire one effect of the 
general calamity was the destruction of commerce. The bar- 
barous nations at first regarded it only as an opportunity for 
robbery ; and when they had subdued the Romans, they hon- 
ored it no more than agriculture, and the other professions of 
a conquered people. 

Soon was the commerce of Europe almost entirely lost. 
The nobility, who had everywhere the direction of affairs, were 
in no pain about it. 

e Suet, in " Claudio," leg. 8 cod. Theodosis. " de Naviculiariis." 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 363 

The laws of the Visigoths f permitted private people to oc- 
cupy half the beds of great rivers, provided the other half re- 
mained free for nets and boats. There must have been very 
little trade in countries conquered by these barbarians. 

In those times were established the ridiculous rights of 
escheatage and shipwrecks. These men thought that, as 
strangers were not united to them by any civil law, they owed 
them on the one hand no kind of justice, and on the other no 
sort of pity. 

In the narrow bounds which nature had originally prescribed 
to the people of the North, all were strangers to them : and in 
then- poverty they regarded all only as contributing to their 
riches. Being established, before their conquest, on the coasts 
of a sea of very little breadth, and full of rocks, from these very 
rocks they drew their subsistence. 

But the Romans, who made laws for all the world, had es- 
tablished the most humane ones with regard to shipwrecks.g 
They suppressed the rapine of those who inhabited the coasts, 
and what was more still, the rapacity of their treasuries./* 

18. — A particular Regulation 

The law of the Visigoths made, however, one regulation in 
favor of commerce.^ It ordained that foreign merchants should 
be judged, in the dififcrences that arose among themselves, by 
the laws and by judges of their own nation. This was founded 
on an established custom among all mixed people, that every 
man should live under his own law — a custom of which I shall 
speak more at large in another place. 

19. — Of Commerce after the Decay of the Roman Pozver 

in the East 

The Mahommedans appeared, conquered, extended, and dis- 
persed themselves. Egypt had particular sovereigns ; these 
carried on the commerce of India, and being possessed of the 
merchandise of this country, drew to themselves the riches of 
all other nations. The sultans of Egypt were the most powerful 
princes of those times. History informs us with what a con- 

/ Lib. VTTT. tit. 4. sec. g. // Leg. i cod. dc naiifragiis. 

g Toto titulo ff. de incend. ruin, et i Lib. II. tit. 3, sec. 2. 

naiifrae. and cod. de naufraKJis, and leg. 
3 IT. ad leg. Cornel, de sicariis. 



364 MONTESQUIEU 

stant and well regulated force they stopped the ardor, the fire, 
and the impetuosity of the crusades. 

20. — Hoiv Commerce broke through the Barbarism of Europe 

Aristotle's philosophy being carried to the west, pleased the 
subtle geniuses who were the virtuosi of those times of ig- 
norance. The schoolmen were infatuated with it, and bor- 
rowed from the philosopher ; a great many notions on lending 
upon interest, whereas its source might have been easily traced 
in the gospel ; in short, they condemned it absolutely and in all 
cases. Hence commerce, which was the profession only of 
mean persons, became that of knaves ; for whenever a thing 
is forbidden, which nature permits or necessity requires, those 
who do it are looked upon as dishonest. 

Commerce was transferred to a nation covered with infamy, 
and soon ranked with the most shameful usury, with monopo- 
lies, with the levying of subsidies, and with all the dishonest 
means of acquiring wealth. 

The Jews, enriched by their exactions, were pillaged by the 
tyranny of princes ; which pleased indeed, but did not ease, the 
people.^ 

What passed in England may serve to give us an idea of what 
was done in other countries. King John / having imprisoned 
the Jews, in order to obtain their wealth, there were few who 
had not at least one of their eyes plucked out. Thus did that 
king administer justice. A certain Jew, who had a tooth pulled 
out every day for seven days successively, gave ten thousand 
marks of silver for the eighth. Henry HI extorted from Aaron, 
a Jew at York, fourteen thousand marks of silver, and ten thou- 
sand for the queen. In those times they did by violence what is 
now done in Poland with some semblance of moderation. As 
princes could not dive into the purses of their subjects because 
of their privileges, they put the Jews to the torture, who were 
not considered as citizens. 

At last a custom was introduced of confiscating the effects of 
those Jews who embraced Christianity. This ridiculous cus- 

i See Aristot. " Polit." lib. I. cap. ix. in the year 1206, between the King, the 

and X. Countess of Champagne, and Guy of 

k See in " Marca Hispanica," the con- Dampierre. t j .. 

stitutions of AraRon, in the years 1228 / Stowe's " Survey of London, book 

and 1231; and in Brussel, the agreement, III. p. 54. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



365 



torn is known only by the law which suppressed it."' The most 
vain and trifling reasons were given in justification of that pro- 
ceeding ; it was alleged that it was proper to try them, in order 
to be certain that they had entirely shaken off the slavery of 
the devil. But it is evident that this confiscation was a species 
of the right of amortization, to recompense the prince, or the 
lords, for the taxes levied on the Jews, which ceased on their 
embracing Christianity. » In those times, men, like lands, 
were regarded as property. I cannot help remarking, by the 
way, how this nation has been sported with from one age to 
another : at one time, their effects were confiscated when they 
wer&amp; willing to become Christians ; and at another, if they re- 
fused to turn Christians, they were ordered to be burned. 

In the meantime, commerce was seen to arise from the bosom 
of vexation and despair. The Jews, proscribed by turns from 
every country, found out the way of saving their effects. Thus 
they rendered their retreats forever fixed ; for though princes 
might have been willing to get rid of their persons, yet they 
did not choose to get rid of their money. 

The Jews invented letters of exchange ; commerce, by this 
method, became capable of eluding violence, and of maintain- 
ing everywhere its ground ; the richest merchant having none 
but invisible effects, which he could convey imperceptibly wher- 
ever he pleased. 

The Theologians were obliged to limit their principles ; and 
commerce, which they had before connected by main force 
with knavery, re-entered, if I may so express myself, the bosom 
of probity. 

Thus we owe to the speculations of the schoolmen all the 
misfortunes which accompanied the destruction of commerce ; P 
and to the avarice of princes, the establishment of a practice 
which puts it in some measure out of their power. 

From this time it became necessary that princes should gov- 



m The edict passed at Baville, 4th of 
April, 1392. 

n In I'rance the Jews were slaves in 
mortmain, and the lords their succes- 
sors. Mr. Brusscl mentions an agree- 
ment made in the year 1206, between the 
King and Thihaut, Count of Cham- 
pagne, by which it was agreed that the 
Jews of the one should not lend in the 
lands of the other. 

o It is known that under Philip Au- 
gustus and I'hilip the Long, the Jews 



who were chased from France took 
refuge in Lombardy, and that there they 
gave to foreign merchants and travellers 
secret letters, drawn upon those to 
whom they had intrusted their effects 
in France, which were accepted. 

P See the 83d novel of the Fmperor 
Leo, which revokes the law of I^asil his 
father. This law of Basil is in Her- 
menopulus, under the name of Leo, lib. 
III. tit. 7, sec. 27. 



366 MONTESQUIEU 

ern with more prudence than they themselves could ever have 
imagined ; for great exertions of authority were, in the event, 
found to be impolitic ; and from experience it is manifest that 
nothing but the goodness and lenity of a government can make 
it flourish. 

We begin to be cured of Machiavelism, and recover from it 
every day. More moderation has become necessary in the 
councils of princes. What would formerly have been called a 
master-stroke in politics would be now, independent of the 
horror it might occasion, the greatest imprudence. 

Happy is it for men that they are in a situation in which, 
though their passions prompt them to be wicked, it is, never- 
theless, to their interest to be humane and virtuous. 



21. — The Discovery of two new Worlds, and in what Manner 

Europe is affected by it 

The compass opened, if I may so express myself, the uni- 
verse. Asia and Africa were found, of which only some borders 
were known ; and America, of which we knew nothing. 

The Portuguese, sailing on the Atlantic Ocean, discovered 
the most southern point of Africa ; they saw a vast sea, which 
carried them to the East Indies. Their danger upon this sea, 
the discovery of Mozambique, Melinda, and Calicut, have been 
sung by Camoens, whose poems make us feel something of 
the charms of the '' Odyssey " and the magnificence of the 
" ^neid." 

The Venetians had hitherto carried on the trade of the Indies 
through the Turkish dominions, and pursued it in the midst of 
oppressions and discouragements. By the discovery of the 
Cape of Good Hope, and those which were made some time 
after, Italy was no longer the centre of the trading world ; it 
was, if I may be permitted the expression, only a corner of the 
universe, and is so still. The commerce even of the Levant 
depending now on that of the great trading nations to both 
the Indies, Italy even in that branch can no longer be con- 
sidered as a principal. 

The Portuguese traded to the Indies in right of conquest. 
The constraining laws which the Dutch at present impose on 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 367 

the commerce of the httle Indian princes had been estabhshed 
before by the Portuguese.9 

The fortune of the house of Austria was prodigious. Charles 
V succeeded to the possession of Burgundy, Castile, and Ara- 
gon ; he arrived afterwards at the imperial dignity ; and to pro- 
cure him a new kind of grandeur, the globe extended itself, and 
thei^ was seen a new world paying him obeisance. 

Christopher Columbus discovered America ; and though 
Spain sent thither only a force so small that the least prince in 
Europe could have sent the same, yet it subdued two vast em- 
pires, and other great states. 

While the Spaniards discovered and conquered the west, the 
Portuguese pushed their conquests and discoveries in the east. 
These two nations met each other ; they had recourse to Pope 
Alexander VI, who made the celebrated line of partition, and 
determined the great suit. 

But the other nations of Europe would not suffer them 
quietly to enjoy their shares. The Dutch chased the Portu- 
guese from almost all their settlements in the East Indies ; and 
several other nations planted colonies in America. 

The Spaniards considered these new-discovered countries as 
the subject of conquest ; while others, more refined in their 
views, found them to be the proper subjects of commerce, and 
upon this principle directed their proceedings. Hence several 
nations have conducted themselves with so much wisdom that 
they have given a kind of sovereignty to companies of mer- 
chants, who, governing these far distant countries only with a 
view to trade, have made a great accessory power without em- 
barrassing the principal state. 

The colonies they have formed are under a kind of de- 
pendence, of which there are but very few instances in all the 
colonies of the ancients ; whether we consider them as holding 
of the state itself, or of some trading company established in 
the state. 

The design of .hese colonies is, to trade on more advan- 
tageous conditionr. than could OLherwise be done with the 
neighboring people, with whom all advantages are reciprocal. 
It has been f^Mablished that the metropolis,'' or mother country, 
alone shaU trade in the colonies, and that from very good rea- 

'' ..le ■ Relation of Fr. Pirard," _ rTIiis. in tlie lanpuaRe of the ancients, 

pari il. cha^. jiv. is the state which founded the colony. 



368 MONTESQUIEU 

son ; because the design of the settlement was the extension of 
commerce, not the foundation of a city or of a new empire. 

Thus it is still a fundamental law of Europe that all com- 
merce with a foreign colony shall be regarded as a mere mon- 
opoly, punishable by the laws of the country ; and in this case 
we are not to be directed by the laws and precedents of the 
ancients, which are not at all applicable.-^ 

It is likewise acknowledged that a commerce established be- 
tween the mother countries does not include a permission to 
trade in the colonies ; for these always continue in a state of 
prohibition. 

The disadvantage of a colony that loses the liberty of com- 
merce is visibly compensated by the protection of the mother 
country, who defends it by her arms, or supports it by her laws. 

Hence follows a third law of Europe, that when a foreign 
commerce with a colony is prohibited, it is not lawful to trade 
in those seas, except in such cases as are excepted by treaty. 

Nations who are, with respect to the whole globe, what indi- 
viduals are in a state, are governed like the latter by the laws 
of nature, and by particular laws of their own making. One na- 
tion may resign to another the sea, as well as the land. The 
Carthaginians forbade the Romans to sail beyond certain 
limits,^ as the Greeks had obliged the King of Persia to keep 
as far distant from the sea-coast as a horse could gallop." 

The great distance of our colonies is not an inconvenience 
that affects their safety ; for if the mother country, on whom 
they depend for their defence, is remote, no less remote are 
those nations who rival the mother country, and by whom they 
may be afraid of being conquered. 

Besides, this distance is the cause that those who are estab- 
lished there cannot conform to the manner of living in a climate 
so dififerent from their own ; they are obliged, therefore, to 
draw from the mother country all the conveniences jf life. The 
Carthaginians,^' to render the Sardinians and Corsicans more 
dependent, forbade their planting, sowing, or doing anything 
of the kind, under pain of death ; so that they supplied them 
with necessaries from Africa. 

J Except the Carthaginians, as we see by treaty not to sail with any vessel of 
by the treaty which put an end to the war beyond the Cyanean rocks and the 
first Punic war. Chelidonean isles.— Plutarch, in the 

t Polyb. lib. III. " Life of Cimon." 

wThe King of Persia obliged himself t/ Aristotle on "Wonderful Things"; 

Livy, lib. VII. dec. 2. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 369 

The Europeans have compassed the same thhig, without hav- 
ing recourse to such severe laws. Our colonies in the Carib- 
bean Islands are under an admirable regulation in this respect ; 
the subject of their commerce is what we neither have nor can 
produce; and they want what is the subject of ours. 

A consequence of the discovery of America was the con- 
necting Asia and Africa with Europe ; it furnished materials 
for a trade with that vast part of Asia known by the name of 
the East Indies. Silver, that metal so useful as the medium of 
commerce, became now as merchandise the basis of the great- 
est commerce in the world. In fine, the navigation to Africa 
became necessary, in order to furnish us with men to labor in 
the mines, and to cultivate the lands of America. 

Europe has arrived at so high a degree of power that noth- 
ing in history can be compared with it, whether we consider the 
immensity of its expenses, the grandeur of its engagements, the 
number of its troops, and the regular payment even of those 
that are least serviceable, and which are kept only for osten- 
tation. 

Father Du Halde says «' that the interior trade of China is 
much greater than that of all Europe. That might be, if our 
foreign trade did not augment our inland commerce, Europe 
carries on the trade and navigation of the other three parts of 
the world ; as France, England, and Holland do nearly that of 
Europe. 

22. — Of the Riches zvhich Spain drew from America 

If Europe has derived so many advantages from the Amer- 
ican trade, it seems natural to imagine that Spain must have 
derived much greater.-f She drew from the newly discovered 
world so prodigious a quantity of gold and silver, that all we 
had before could not be compared with it. 

But (what one could never have expected) this great king- 
dom was everywhere baffled by its misfortunes. Philip II, who 
succeeded Charles V, was obliged to make the celebrated bank- 
ruptcy known to all the world. There never was a prince who 
suffered more from the murmurs, the insolence, and the revolt 
of troops constantly ill paid. 

7t' Tom. ii. p. 170. ahoiit twenty years apo; wMch lias been 

.r This lias been already shown in a almost entirely incorporated in the 
small treatise written by the author present work. 

Vol. I. — 24 



37© MONTESQUIEU 

From that time the monarchy of Spain has been incessantly 
decHning. This has been owing to an interior and physical de- 
fect in the nature of those riches, which renders them vain — a 
defect which increases every day. 

Gold and silver are either a fictitious or a representative 
wealth. The representative signs of wealth are extremely dur- 
able, and, in their own nature, but little subject to decay. 
But the more they are multiplied, the more they lose their value, 
because the fewer are the things which they represent. 

The Spaniards, after the conquest of Mexico and Peru, aban- 
doned their natural riches, in pursuit of a representative wealth 
which daily degraded itself. Gold and silver were extremely 
scarce in Europe, and Spain becoming all of a sudden mistress 
of a prodigious quantity of these metals, conceived hopes to 
which she had never before aspired. The wealth she found in 
the conquered countries, great as it was, did not, however, 
equal that of her mines. The Indians concealed part of 
them ; and besides, these people, who made no other use of 
gold and silver than to give magnificence to the temples of their 
gods and to the palaces of their kings, sought not for it with an 
avarice like ours. In short, they had not the secret of drawing 
these metals from every mine ; but only from those in which 
the separation might be made with fire : they were strangers to 
the manner of making use of mercury, and perhaps to mercury 
itself. 

However, it was not long before the specie of Europe was 
doubled ; this appeared from the price of commodities, which 
everywhere was doubled. 

The Spaniards raked into the mines, scooped out mountains, 
invented machines to draw out water, to break the ore, and 
separate it; and as they sported with the lives of the Indians, 
they forced them to labor without mercy. The specie of Eu- 
rope soon doubled, and the profit of Spain diminished in the 
same proportion ; they had every year the same quantity of 
metal, which had become by one-half less precious. 

In double the time the specie still doubled, and the profit still 
diminished another half. 

It diminished even more than half : let us see in what man- 
ner. 

To extract the gold from the mines, to give it the requisite 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 371 

preparations, and to import it into Europe, must be attended 
with some certain expense. I will suppose this to be as i to 64. 
When the specie was once doubled, and consequently became 
by one-half less precious, the expense was as 2 to 64. Thus the 
galoons which brought to Spain the same quantity of gold, 
brought a thing which really was of less value by one-half, 
though the expenses attending it had been twice as high. 

If we proceed doubling and doubling, we shall find in this 
progression the cause of the impotency of the wealth of Spain. 

It is about two hundred years since they have worked their 
Indian mines. I suppose the quantity of specie at present in the 
trading world is to that before the discovery of the Indies as 32 
is to I ; that is, it has been doubled five times : in two hundred 
years more the same quantity will be to that before the dis- 
covery as 64 is to I ; that is, it will be doubled once more. Now, 
at present, fifty quintals of ore yield four, five, and six ounces of 
gold ; y and when it yields only two, the miner receives no more 
from it than his expenses. In two himdred years, when the 
miner will extract only four, this too will only defray his 
charges. There will then be but little profit to be drawn from 
the gold mines. The same reasoning will hold good of silver, 
except that the working of the silver mines is a little more ad- 
vantageous than those of gold. 

But, if mines should be discovered so fruitful as to give a 
much greater profit, the more fruitful they may be, the sooner 
the profit will cease. 

The Portuguese in Brazil have found mines of gold so rich,- 
that they must necessarily very soon make a considerable 
diminution in the profits of those of Spain, as well as in their 
own. 

I have frequently heard people deplore the blindness of the 
Court of France, who repulsed Christopher Columbus, when 
he made the proposal of discovering the Indies.^ Indeed they 
did, though perhaps without design, an act of the greatest wis- 
dom. Spain has behaved like the foolish king who desired that 

y Sec Frezicr's " Voyages." were far from hcinp so considerable an 

r: According to Lord Anson, Europe item as tlioy arc at [iresent. 

receives every year from I'.razil two a Voltaire deplores the insufficiency of 

millions sterlinp in Rold, which is found Montesquieu's knowledge upon finance 

in sand at the foot of the mountains, or and commerce, saying that these prin- 

in the hids of rivers. When T wrote the ci[)Ies were not then discovered, or, at 

little treatise mentioned in the first note least, had not been developed in his 

of this chapter the returns from llrazil time. — Ed. 



372 MONTESQUIEU 

everything he touched might be converted into gold, and who 
was obHged to beg of the gods to put an end to his misery. 

The companies and banks estabhshed in many nations have 
put a finishing stroke to the lowering of gold and silver as a 
sign of representation of riches ; for by new fictions they have 
multiplied in such a manner the signs of wealth, that gold and 
silver having this offtce only in part have become less precious. 

Thus public credit serves instead of mines, and diminishes 
the profit which the Spaniards drew from theirs. 

True it is that the Dutch trade to the East Indies has in- 
creased, in some measure, the value of the Spanish merchan- 
dise : b for as they carry bullion, and give it in exchange for the 
merchandise of the East, they ease the Spaniards of part of a 
commodity which in Europe abounds too much. 

And this trade, in which Spain seems to be only indirectly 
concerned, is as advantageous to that nation as to those who 
are directly employed in carrying it on. 

From what has been said we may form a judgment of the last 
order of the Council of Spain, which prohibits the making use 
of gold and silver in gildings, and other superfluities ; a decree 
as ridiculous as it would be for the states of Holland to prohibit 
the consumption of spices. 

My reasoning does not hold good against all mines ; those 
of Germany and Hungary, which produce little more than the 
expense of working them, are extremely useful. They are 
found in the principal state ; they employ many thousand men, 
who there consume their superfluous commodities, and they 
are properly a manufacture of the country. 

The mines of Germany and Hungary promote the culture of 
land ; the working of those of Mexico and Peru destroys it. 

The Indies and Spain are two powers under the same master ; 
but the Indies are the principal, while Spain is only an acces- 
sory. It is in vain for politics to attempt to bring back the 
principal to the accessory ; the Indies will always draw Spain 
to themselves. 

Of the merchandise, to the value of about fifty millions of 
livres, annually sent to the Indies, Spain furnishes only two 
millions and a half: the Indies trade for fifty millions, the 
Spaniards for two and a half. 

h Voltaire holds that the Spaniards that they were obliged to draw such 
had no manufactures of their own, and supplies from abroad. — Ed. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 373 

That must be a bad kind of riches which depends on accident, 
and not on the industry of a nation, on the number of its inhab- 
itants, and on the cuhivation of its lands. The King of Spain, 
who receives great sums from his custom-house at Cadiz, is 
in this respect only a rich individual in a state extremely poor. 
Everything passes between strangers and himself, while his 
subjects have scarcely any share in it ; this commerce is inde- 
pendent both of the good and bad fortune of his kingdom. 

Were some provinces of Castile able to give him a sum equal 
to that of the custom-house of Cadiz, his power would be much 
greater; his riches would be the effect of the wealth of the 
country ; these provinces would animate all the others, and 
they would be altogether more capable of supporting their re- 
spective charges ; instead of a great treasury he would have a 
great people. 

23. — A Problem 

It is not for me to decide the question whether if Spain be 
not herself able to carry on the trade of the Indies, it would 
not be better to leave it open to strangers. I will only say that 
it is for their advantage to load this commerce with as few 
obstacles as politics will permit. When the merchandise which 
several nations send to the Indies is very dear, the inhabitants 
of that country give a great deal of their commodities, which 
are gold and silver, for very little of those of foreigners ; the 
contrary to this happens when they are at a low price. It would 
perhaps be of use that these nations should undersell each other, 
to the end that the merchandise carried to the Indies misrht be 
always cheap. These are principles which deserve to be ex- 
amined, without separating them, however, from other con- 
siderations : the safety of the Indies, the advantages of only 
one custom-house, the danger of making great alterations, and 
the foreseen inconveniences, which are often less dangerous 
than those which cannot be foreseen. 



BOOK XXII 

OF LAWS IN RELATION TO THE USE OF MONEY 

I. — The Reason of the Use of Money 

PEOPLE who have Httle merchandise, as savages, and 
among civilized nations those who have only two or 
three species, trade by exchange. Thus the caravans of 
Moors that go to Timbuctoo, in the heart of Africa, have no 
need of money, for they exchange their salt for gold. The 
Moor puts his salt in a heap, and the Negro his dust in an- 
other ; if there is not gold enough, the Moor takes away some 
of his salt, or the Negro adds more gold, till both parties are 
agreed. 

But when a nation traffics with a great variety of merchan- 
dise, money becomes necessary ; because a metal easily carried 
from place to place saves the great expenses which people 
would be obliged to be at if they always proceeded by exchange. 

As all nations have reciprocal wants, it frequently happens 
that one is desirous of a large quantity of the other's merchan- 
dise, when the latter will have very little of theirs, though with 
respect to another nation the case is directly opposite. But 
when nations have money, and proceed by buying and selling, 
those who take most merchandise pay the balance in specie. 
And there is this difference, that in the case of buying, the 
trade carried on is in proportion to the wants of the nation that 
has the greatest demands ; whilst in bartering, the trade is only 
according to the wants of the nation whose demands are the 
fewest ; without which the latter would be under an impossi- 
bility of balancing its accounts. 

2. — Of the Nature of Money 

Money is a sign which represents the value of all merchan- 
dise. Metal is taken for this sign, as being durable.^ because 

a The salt made use of for this purpose in Abyssinia has this defect, that it is 
continually wasting away. 

374 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 375 

it consumes but little by use ; and because, without being de- 
stroyed, it is capable of many divisions. A precious metal has 
been chosen as a sign, as being most portable. A metal is most 
proper for a common measure, because it can be easily reduced 
to the same standard. Every state fixes upon it a particular 
impression, to the end that the form may correspond with the 
standard and the weight, and that both may be known by in- 
spection only. 

The Athenians, not having the use of metals, made use of 
oxen,&amp; and the Romans of sheep ; but one ox is not the same 
as another ox in the manner that one piece of metal may be the 
same as another. 

As specie is the sign of the value of merchandise, paper is 
the sign of the value of specie ; and when it is of the right sort, 
it represents this value in such a manner that as to the effects 
produced by it there is not the least difference. 

In the same manner, as money is the sign and representative 
of a thing, everything is a sign and representative of money; 
and the state is in a prosperous condition when on the one 
hand money perfectly represents all things, and on the other 
all things perfectly represent money, and are reciprocally the 
sign of each other ; that is, when they have such a relative value 
that we may have the one as soon as we have the other. This 
never happens in any other than a moderate government, nor 
does it always happen there ; for example, if the laws favor the 
dishonest debtor, his effects are no longer a representative or 
sign of money. With regard to a despotic government, it 
would be a prodigy did things there represent their sign. 
Tyranny and distrust make everyone bury their specie ; c things 
therefore are not there the representative of money. 

Legislators have sometimes had the art not only to make 
things in their own nature the representative of specie, but to 
convert them even into specie, like the current coin. Caesar, 
when he was dictator, permitted debtors to give their lands in 
payment to their creditors, at the price they were worth before 
the civil war.t^ Tiberius ordered that those who desired specie 

h Herodotus, in " Clio," tells tis tliat c Tt is an ancient custom in Algiers 

the Lydians found out the art of coin- for the father of a family to have a 

ing money; the Orccks learned it from treasure concealed in the earth. — " His- 

thcm; the Athenian coin had the im- tory of the Kingdom of Algiers," by 

pression of their ancient ox. f have T^auRier de Tassis. 

seen one of those pieces in the Earl of rf Cxsar on the "Civil War," book 

Pembroke's cabinet. III, 



376 MONTESQUIEU 

should have it from the public treasury on binding over their 
land to double the value. c Under Caesar the lands were the 
money which paid all debts ; under Tiberius ten thousand ses- 
terces in land became as current money equal to five thousand 
sesterces in silver. 

The Magna Charta of England provides against the seizing 
of the lands or revenues of a debtor, when his movable or per- 
sonal goods are sufficient to pay, and he is willing to give them 
up to his creditors ; thus all the goods of an Englishman rep- 
resented money. 

The laws of the Germans constituted money a satisfaction for 
the injuries that were committed, and for the sufferings due to 
guilt. But as there was but very little specie in the country, 
they again constituted this money to be paid in goods or chat- 
tels. This we find appointed in a Saxon law, with certain regu- 
lations suitable to the ease and convenience of the several ranks 
of people. At first the law declared the value of a sou in cat- 
tle ; f the sou of two tremises answered to an ox of twelve 
months, or to a ewe with her lamb ; that of three tremises was 
worth an ox of sixteen months. With these people money be- 
came cattle, goods, and merchandise, and these again became 
money. 

Money is not only a sign of things ; it is also a sign and rep- 
resentative of money, as we shall see in the chapter on ex- 
change. 

3. — Of Ideal Money 

There is both real and ideal money. Civilized nations gen- 
erally make use of ideal money only, because they have con- 
verted their real money into ideal. At first their real money 
was some metal of a certain weight and standard, but soon dis- 
honesty or want made them retrench a part of the metal from 
every piece of money, to which they left the same name ; for 
example, from a livre at a pound weight they took half the 
silver, and still continued to call it a livre ; the piece which was 
the twentieth part of a pound of silver they continued to call a 
sou, though it is no more the twentieth part of this pound of 
silver. By this method the livre is an ideal livre, and the sou 
an ideal sou. Thus of the other subdivisions : and so far may 

t Tacitus, lib. VI. / *' The Laws of the Saxons," chap, xviii. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 377 

this be carried that what we call a livre shall be only a small 
part of the original livre or pound, which renders it still more 
ideal. It may even happen that we have no piece of money of 
the precise value of a livre, nor any piece exactly with a sou, 
then the livre and the sou will be purely ideal. They may give 
to any piece of money the demonmination of as many livres and 
as many sous as they please, the variation may be continual, 
because it is as easy to give another name to a thing as it is 
difficult to change the thing itself. 

To take away the source of this abuse, it would be an ex- 
cellent law for all countries who are desirous of making com- 
merce flourish, to ordain that none but real money should be 
current, and to prevent any methods from being taken to ren- 
der it ideal. 

Nothing ought to be so exempt from variation as that which 
is the common measure of all. 

Trade is in its own nature extremely uncertain ; and it is a 
great evil to add a new uncertainty to that which is founded on 
the nature of the thing. 

4. — Of the Quantity of Gold and Silver 

While civilized nations are the mistresses of the world, gold 
and silver, whether they draw it from among themselves, or 
fetch it from the mines, must increase every day. On the con- 
trary, it diminishes when barbarous nations prevail. We know 
how great was the scarcity of these metals when the Goths and 
Vandals on the one side, and on the other the Saracens and 
Tartars, broke in like a torrent on the civilized world. 

5. — The same Subject continued 

The bullion drawn from the American mines, imported into 
Europe, and thence sent to the East, has greatly promoted the 
navigation of the European nations ; for it is merchandise 
which Europe receives in exchange from America, and which 
she sends in exchange to the Indies. A prodigious quantity 
of gold and silver is therefore an advantage, when we consider 
these metals as merchandise ; but it is otherwise when we con- 
sider them as a sign, because their abundance gives an alloy to 
their quality as a sign, which is chiefly founded on their scar- 
city. 



378 MONTESQUIEU 

Before the first Punic war g copper was to silver as 960 to i ; ^ 
it is at present nearly as y;^y2 to i. When the proportion shall 
be as it was formerly, sjlver will better perform its office as a 
sign. 

6. — The Reason why Interest was lowered one-half after 
the Conquest of the Indies 

Garcilaso informs us i that in Spain after the conquest of the 
Indies the interest, which was at ten per cent., fell to five. This 
was a necessary consequence. A great quantity of specie being 
all of a sudden brought into Europe, much fewer persons had 
need of money. The price of all things increased, while the 
value of money diminished ; the proportion was then broken, 
and all the old debts were discharged. We may recollect the 
time of the System,/ when everything was at a high price ex- 
cept specie. Those who had money after the conquest of the 
Indies were obliged to lower the price or hire of their mer- 
chandise, that is, in other words, their interest. 

From this time they were unable to bring interest to its 
ancient standard, because the quantity of specie brought to 
Europe has been annually increasing. Besides, as the pubUc 
funds of some states, founded on riches procured by com- 
merce, gave but a very small interest, it became necessary for 
the contracts of individuals to be regulated by these. In short, 
the course of exchange having rendered the conveying of 
specie from one country to another remarkably easy; money 
cannot be scarce in a place where they may be so readily sup- 
plied with it by those who have it in plenty. 

7. — How the Price of Things is -fixed in the Variation of 

the Sign of Riches 

Money is the price of merchandise or manufactures. But 
how shall we fix this price? Or, in other words, by what piece 
of money is everything to be represented ? 

If we compare the mass of gold and silver in the whole world 
with the quantity of merchandise therein contained, it is cer- 
tain that every commodity or merchandise in particular may 

g See cTiap. 12 of this boolc. i " History of the Civil Wars of the 

h Supposing a mark of eight ounces Spaniards in the West Indies." 

of silver to be worth forty-nine livres, / In France, Law's project was called 

and copper twenty sols per pound. by this name. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 379 

be compared to a certain portion of the entire mass of gold and 
silver. As the total of the one is to the total of the other, so 
part of the one will be to part of the other. Let us suppose 
that there is only one commodity or merchandise in the world, 
or only one to be purchased, and that this is divisible like 
money ; a part of this merchandise will answer to a part of the 
mass of gold and silver ; the half of the total of the one to the 
half of the total of the other ; the tenth, the hundredth, the thou- 
sandth part of the one, to the tenth, the hundredth, the thou- 
sandth part of the other. But as that which constitutes property 
among mankind is not all at once in trade, and as the metals or 
money which are the sign of property are not all in trade at 
the same time, the price is fixed in the compound ratio of the 
total of things with the total of signs, and that of the total of 
things in trade with the total of signs in trade also ; and as the 
things which are not in trade to-day may be in trade to-mor- 
row, and the signs not now in trade may enter into trade at the 
same time, the establishment of the price of things fundamen- 
tally depends on the proportion of the total of things to the total 
of signs. 

Thus the prince or the magistrate can no more ascertain the 
value of merchandise than he can establish by a decree that 
the relation i has to 10 is equal to that of i to 20. Julian's 
lowering the price of provisions at Antioch was the cause of a 
most terrible famine.^ 

8. — The same Subject continued 

The negroes on the coast of Africa have a sign of value with- 
out money. It is a sign merely ideal, founded on the degree 
of esteem which they fix in their minds for all merchandise, in 
proportion to the need they have of it. A certain commodity 
or merchandise is worth three macoutes ; another, six ma- 
coutes; another, ten macoutes; that is, as if they said simply 
three, six, and ten. The price is formed by a comparison of all 
merchandise with each other. They have therefore no particu- 
lar money ; but each kind of merchandise is money to the other. 

Let us for a moment transfer to ourselves this manner of 
valuing things, and join it with ours: all the merchandise and 
goods in the world, or else all the merchandise or manufactures 

k " History of the Church," by Socrates, lib. II. 



380 MONTESQUIEU 

of a state, particularly considered as separate from all others, 
would be worth a certain number of macoutes ; and, dividing 
the money of this state into as many parts as there are ma- 
coutes, one part of this division of money will be the sign of a 
macoute. 

If we suppose the quantity of specie in a state doubled, it 
will be necessary to double the specie in the macoute ; but if 
in doubling the specie you double also the macoute, the pro- 
portion will remain the same as before the doubling of either. 

If, since the discovery of the Indies, gold and silver have in- 
creased in Europe in the proportion of i to 20, the price of 
provisions and merchandise must have been enhanced in the 
proportion of i to 20. But if, on the other hand, the quantity 
of merchandise has increased as i to 2 — it necessarily follows 
that the price of this merchandise and provisions, having been 
raised in proportion of i to 20, and fallen in proportion of i to 
2 — it necessarily follows, I say, that the proportion is only as 
I to 10. 

The quantity of goods and merchandise increases by an aug- 
mentation of commerce, the augmentation of commerce by an 
augmentation of the specie which successively arrives, and by 
new communications with freshly discovered countries and 
seas, which furnish us with new commodities and new mer- 
chandise. 

9. — Of the relative Scarcity of Gold and Silver 

Besides the positive plenty and scarcity of gold and silver, 
there is still a relative abundance and a relative scarcity of one 
of these metals compared with the other. 

The avaricious hoard up their gold and silver, for as they do 
not care to spend, they are fond of signs that are not subject to 
decay. They prefer gold to silver, because as they are always 
afraid of losing, they can best conceal that which takes up the 
least room. Gold, therefore, disappears when there is plenty 
of silver, by reason that every one has some to conceal ; it ap- 
pears again when silver is scarce, because they are obliged to 
draw it from its confinement. 

It is then a rule, that gold is common when silver is scarce, 
and gold is scarce when silver is common. This lets us see the 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 3S1 

difference between their relative and their real abundance and 
scarcity, of which I shall presently speak more at large. 

10. — Of Exchange 

The relative abundance and scarcity of specie in different 
countries forms what is called the course of exchange. 

Exchange is a fixing of the actual and momentary value of 
money. 

Silver as a metal has value like all other merchandise, and an 
additional value as it is capable of becoming the sign of other 
merchandise. If it were no more than mere merchandise, it 
would lose much of its value. 

Silver, as money, has a value, which the prince in some re- 
spects can fix, and in others cannot. 

I. The prince establishes a proportion between a quantity 
of silver as metal, and the same quantity as money. 2. He fixes 
the proportion between the several metals made use of as 
money. 3. He establishes the weight and standard of every 
piece of money. In fine, 4. He gives to every piece that ideal 
value of which I have spoken. I shall call the value of money 
in these four respects its positive value, because it may be fixed 
by law. 

The coin of every state has, besides this, a relative value, as 
it is compared with the money of other countries. This relative 
value is established by the exchange, and greatly depends on 
its positive value. It is fixed by the general opinion of the mer- 
chants, never by the decrees of the prince ; because it is subject 
to incessant variations, and depends on a thousand accidents. 

The several nations, in fixing this relative value, are chiefly 
guided by that which has the greatest quantity of specie. If 
she has as much specie as all the others together, it is then most 
proper for the others to regulate theirs by her standard: and the 
regulation between all the others will pretty nearly agree with 
the regulation made with this principal nation. 

In the actual state of the globe, Holland I is the nation we are 

/ The Dutch repul.ite the exchnnRe for for all Europe, it would be done in a 

almost all Europe, by a kind of deter- manner most advantageous to them- 

mination amonj? tlicmsclves, in a man- selves, which woulri not be permitted; 

ner most aRreeable to their own Inter- and experience further contradicts Mon- 

ests. In point of fact, however, if the tesquieu's statement. — Ed. 
Dutch undertook to regulate exchange 



382 MONTESQUIEU 

speaking of. Let us examine the course of exchange with re- 
lation to her. 

They have in Holland a piece of money called a florin, worth 
twenty sous, or forty half-sous or gros. But, to render our 
ideas as simple as possible, let us imagine that they have not 
any such piece of money in Holland as a florin, and that they 
have no other but the gros : a man who should have a thousand 
florins should have forty thousand gros ; and so of the rest. 
Now the exchange with Holland is determined by our know- 
ing how many gros every piece of money in other countries is 
worth ; and as the French commonly reckon by a crown of 
three livres, the exchange makes it necessary for them to 
know how many gros are contained in a crown of three livres. 
If the course of exchange is at fifty-four, a crown of three livres 
will be worth fifty-four gros ; if it is at sixty, it will be worth 
sixty gros. If silver is scarce in France, a crown of three livres 
will be worth more gros; if plentiful, it will be worth less. 

This scarcity or plenty, whence results the mutability of the 
course of exchange, is not the real, but a relative, scarcity or 
plenty. For example, when France has greater occasion for 
funds in Holland than the Dutch of having funds in France, 
specie is said to be common in France and scarce in Holland : 
and vice versa. 

Let us suppose that the course of exchange with Holland is 
at fifty-four. If France and Holland composed only one city, 
they would act as we do when we give change for a crown: 
the Frenchman would take three livres out of his pocket, and 
the Dutchman fifty-four gros from his. But as there is some 
distance between Paris and Amsterdam, it is necessary that he 
who for a crown of three livres gives me fifty-four gros, which 
he has in Holland, should give me a bill of exchange for fifty- 
four gros payable in Holland. The fifty-four gros is not the 
thing in question, but a bill for that sum. Thus, in order to 
judge of the scarcity or plenty of specie,'" we must know if there 
are in France more bills of fifty-four gros drawn upon Holland 
than there are crowns drawn upon France. If there are more 
bills from Holland than there are from France, specie is scarce 
in France, and common in Holland ; it then becomes necessary 

m There is much specie in a place there is little when there is more paper 
when there is more specie than paper; than specie. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 383 

that the exchange should rise, and that they give for my crown 
more than fifty-four gros ; otherwise I will not part with it ; 
and vice versa. 

Thus the various turns in the course of exchange form an 
account of debtor and creditor, which must be frequently set- 
tled, and which the state in debt can no more discharge by 
exchange than an individual can pay a debt by giving change 
for a piece of silver. 

We will suppose that there are but three states in the world, 
France, Spain, and Holland ; that several individuals in Spain 
are indebted to France, to the value of one hundred thousand 
marks of silver ; and that several individuals of France owe in 
Spain one hundred and ten thousand marks : now, if some cir- 
cumstance both in Spain and France should cause each to with- 
draw his specie, what will then be the course of exchange? 
These two nations will reciprocally acquit each other of a hun- 
dred thousand marks : but France will still owe ten thousand 
marks in Spain, and the Spaniards will still have bills upon 
France, to the value of ten thousand marks ; while France 
will have none at all upon Spain. 

But if Holland was in a contrary situation with respect to 
France, and in order to balance the account must pay her ten 
thousand marks, the French would have two ways of paying 
the Spaniards ; either by giving their creditors in Spain bills 
for ten thousand marks upon their debtors in Holland, or else 
by sending specie to the value of ten thousand marks to Spain. 

Hence it follows that when a state has occasion to remit a 
sum of money to another country, it is indififcrent, in the nature 
of the thing, whether specie be conveyed thither or they take 
bills of exchange. The advantage or disadvantage of these two 
methods solely depends on actual circumstances. We must 
inquire which will yield most gros in Holland — money carried 
thither in specie, or a bill upon Holland for the like sum." 

When money of the same standard and weight in France 
yields money of the same standard and weight in Holland, we 
say that the exchange is at par. In the actual state of specie 
the par is nearly at fifty-four gros to the crown. When the ex- 
change is above fifty-four gros, we say it is high ; when be- 
neath, we say it is low. 

M With the expenses of carriage and insurance deducted. o In 1744. 



384 MONTESQUIEU 

In order to know the loss and gain of a state in a particular 
situation of exchange, it must be considered as debtor and cred- 
itor, as buyer and seller. When the exchange is below par, it 
loses as a debtor, and gains as a creditor ; it loses as a buyer 
and gains as a seller. It is obvious it loses as debtor ; suppose, 
for example, France owes Holland a certain number of gros, 
the fewer gros there are in a crown the more crowns she has 
to pay. On the contrary, if France is creditor for a certain num- 
ber of gros, the less number of gros there are in a crown the 
more crowns she will receive. The state loses also as buyer, for 
there must be the same number of gros to purchase the same 
quantity of merchandise ; and while the exchange is low, every 
French crown is worth fewer gros. For the same reason the 
state gains as a seller. I sell my merchandise in Holland for a 
certain number of gros ; I receive then more crowns in France, 
when for every fifty gros I receive a crown, than I should do if 
I received only the same crown for every fifty-four. The con- 
trary to this takes place in the other state. If the Dutch are 
indebted a certain number of crowns to France, they will gain ; 
if this money is owing to them, they will lose ; if they sell, they 
lose ; and if they buy, they gain. 

It is proper to pursue this somewhat further. When the ex- 
change is below par ; for example, if it be at fifty instead of 
fifty-four, it should follow that France, on sending bills of ex- 
change to Holland for fifty-four thousand crowns, could buy 
merchandise only to the value of fifty thousand ; and that on 
the other hand, the Dutch sending the value of fifty thousand 
crowns to France might buy fifty-four thousand, which makes 
a difference of /j, that is, a loss to France of more than one- 
seventh ; so that France would be obliged to send to Holland 
one-seventh more in specie or merchandise than she would do 
were the exchange at par. And as the mischief must constantly 
increase, because a debt of this kind would bring the exchange 
still lower, France would in the end be ruined. It seems, I say, 
as if this should certainly follow ; and yet it does not, because 
of the principle which I have elsewhere established ; P which is, 
that states constantly lean towards a balance, in order to pre- 
serve their independency. Thus they borrow only in propor- 
tion to their ability to pay, and measure their buying by what 

p See book XX. chap. xxi. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 385 

they sell ; and taking the example from above, if the exchange 
falls in France from fifty-four to fifty, the Dutch who buy mer- 
chandise in France to the value of a thousand crowns, for 
which they used to pay fifty-four thousand gros, would now 
pay only fifty thousand, if the French would consent to it. 
But the merchandise of France will rise insensibly, and the 
profit will be shared between the French and the Dutch ; for 
when a merchant can gain, he easily shares his profit ; there 
arises then a communication of profit between the French and 
the Dutch. In the same manner the French, who bought mer- 
chandise of Holland for fifty-four thousand gros, and who, 
when the exchange was at fifty-four, paid for them a thousand 
crowns, will be obliged to add one-seventh more in French 
crowns to buy the same merchandise. But the French mer- 
chant, being sensible of the loss he suffers, will take up less of 
the merchandise of Holland. The French and the Dutch mer- 
chant will then both be losers, the state will insensibly fall into 
a balance, and the lowering of the exchange will not be at- 
tended with all those inconveniences which we had reason to 
fear. 

A merchant may send his stock into a foreign country when 
the exchange is below par without injuring his fortune, be- 
cause, when it returns, he recovers what he had lost ; but a 
prince who sends only specie into a foreign country which never 
can return, is always a loser. 

When the merchants have great dealings in any country, 
the exchange there infallibly rises. This proceeds from their 
entering into many engagements, buying great quantities of 
merchandise, and drawing upon foreign countries to pay for 
them. 

A prince may amass great wealth in his dominions, and yet 
specie may be really scarce, and relatively common ; for in- 
stance, if the state is indebted for much merchandise to a for- 
eign country, the exchange will be low, though specie be scarce. 

The exchange of all places constantly tends to a certain pro- 
portion, and that in the very nature of things. If the course of 
exchange from Ireland to England is below par, and that of 
England to Holland is also imder par, that of Ireland to Hol- 
land will be still lower ; that is, in the compound ratio of that 
of Ireland to England, and that of England to Holland ; for a 
Vol. I.— 25 



386 MONTESQUIEU 

Dutch merchant who can have his specie indirectly from Ire- 
land, by way of England, will not choose to pay dearer by hav- 
ing it in the direct way. This, I say, ought naturally to be the 
case ; but, however, it is not exactly so. There are always cir- 
cumstances which vary these things ; and the different profit 
of drawing by one place, or of drawing by another, constitutes 
the particular art and dexterity of the bankers, which does not 
belong to the present subject. 

When a state raises its specie, for instance, when it gives 
the name of six livres, or two crowns, to what was before 
called three livres, or one crown, this new denomination, which 
adds nothing real to the crown, ought not to procure a single 
gros more by the exchange. We ought only to have for the 
two new crowns the same number of gros which we before 
received for the old one. If this does not happen, it must not 
be imputed as an efifect of the regulation itself, but to the nov- 
elty and suddenness of the afifair. The exchange adheres to 
what is already established, and is not altered till after a cer- 
tain time. 

When a state, instead of only raising the specie by a law, 
calls it in in order to diminish its size, it frequently happens 
that during the time taken up in passing again through the 
mint there are two kinds of money — the large, which is the 
old, and the small, which is the new ; and as the large is cried 
down as not to be received as money, and bills of exchange 
must consequently be paid in the new, one would imagine 
then that the exchange should be regulated by the new. If, 
for example, in France, the ancient crown of three livres, be- 
ing worth in Holland sixty gros, was reduced one-half, the 
new crown ought to be valued only at thirty. On the other 
hand, it seems as if the exchange ought to be regulated by 
the old coin ; because the banker who has specie, and receives 
bills, is obliged to carry the old coin to the mint in order to 
change it for the new, by which he must be a loser. The ex- 
change then ought to be fixed between the value of the old 
coin and that of the new. The value of the old is decreased, if 
we may call it so, both because there is already some of the 
new in trade, and because the bankers cannot keep up to the 
rigor of the law, having an interest in letting loose the old 
coin from their chests, and being sometimes obliged to make 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 387 

payments with it. Again, the vahie of the new specie must 
rise, because the banker having this finds himseh in a situa- 
tion in which, as we shall immediately prove, he will reap great 
advantage by procuring the old. The exchange should then 
be fixed, as I have already said, between the new and the old 
coin. For then the bankers find it their interest to send the 
old out of the kingdom, because by this method they procure 
the same advantage as they could receive from a regular ex- 
change of the old specie, that is, a great many gros in Holland ; 
and in return, a regular exchange a little lower, between the 
old and the new specie, which would bring many crowns to 
France. 

Suppose that three livres of the old coin yield by the actual 
exchange forty-five gros, and that by sending this same crown 
to Holland they receive sixty, but with a bill of forty-five gros, 
they procure a crown of three livres in France, which being sent 
in the old specie to Holland, still yields sixty gros ; thus all 
the old specie would be sent out of the kingdom, and the 
bankers would run away with the whole profit. 

To remedy this, new measures must be taken. Tire state 
which coined the new specie would itself be obliged to send 
great quantities of the old to the nation which regulates the 
exchange, and, by thus gaining credit there, raise the exchange 
pretty nearly to as many gros for a crown of three livres out 
of the country. I say to nearly the same, for while the profits 
are small the bankers will not be tempted to send it abroad, 
because of the expense of carriage and the danger of confisca- 
tion. 

It is fit that we should give a very clear idea of this. Mr. 
Bernard, or any other banker employed by the state, proposes 
bills upon Holland, and gives them at one, two, or three gros 
higher than the actual exchange ; he has made a provision in 
a foreign country, by means of the old specie, which he has 
continuallv been sending thither; and thus he has raised the 
exchange to the point we have just mentioned. Tn the mean- 
time, by disposing of his bills, he seizes on all the new specie, 
and obliges the other bankers, v/ho have payments to make, 
to carry their old specie to the mint ; and. as he insensibly ob- 
tains all the specie, he obliges the other bankers to give him 
bills of exchange at a very high price. By this means his 



388 MONTESQUIEU 

profit in the end compensates in a great measure for the loss 
he suffered at the beginning. 

It is evident that during these transactions the state must be 
in a dangerous crisis. Specie must- become extremely scarce — 
I, because much the greatest part is cried down; 2, because a 
part will be sent into foreign countries ; 3, because every one 
will lay it up, as not being willing to give that profit to the 
prince which he hopes to receive himself. It is dangerous to 
do it slowly ; and dangerous also to do it in too much haste. 
If the supposed gain be immoderate, the inconveniences in- 
crease in proportion. 

We see, from what has been already said, that when the 
exchange is lower than the specie, a profit may be made by 
sending it abroad ; for the same reason, when it is higher than 
the specie, there is profit in causing it to return. 

But there is a case in which profit may be made by sending 
the specie out of the kingdom, when the exchange is at par ; 
that is, by sending it into a foreign country to be coined over 
again. When it returns, an advantage may be made of it, 
whether it be circulated in the country or paid for foreign bills. 

If a company has been erected in a state with an immense 
number of shares, and these shares have in a few months risen 
twenty or twenty-five times above the original purchase value ; 
if, again, the same state established a bank, whose bills were to 
perform the office of money, while the legal value of these bills 
was prodigious, in order to answer to the legal value of the 
shares (this is Mr. Law's System), it would follow, from the 
nature of things, that these shares and these bills would vanish 
in the same manner as they arose. Stocks cannot suddenly be 
raised twenty or twenty-five times above their original value 
without giving a nimiber of people the means of procuring 
immense riches in paper : every one would endeavor to make 
his fortune ; and as the exchange offers the most easy way 
of removing it from home, or conveying it whither one pleases, 
people would incessantly remit a part of their effects to the 
nation that regulates the exchange. A continual process of 
remittances into a foreign country must lower the exchange. 
Let us suppose that at the time of the System, in proportion to 
the standard and weight of the silver coin, the exchange was 
fixed at forty gros to the crown ; when a vast quantity of paper 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 389 

became money, they were unwilling to give more than thirty- 
nine gros for a crown, and afterwards thirty-eight, thirty-seven, 
etc. This proceeded so far, that after a while they would give 
but eight gros, and at last there was no exchange at all. 

The exchange ought in this case to have regulated the pro- 
portion between the specie and the paper of France. I sup- 
pose that, by the weight and standard of the silver, the crown 
of three livres in silver was worth forty gros, and that the ex- 
change being made in paper, the crown of three livres in paper 
was worth only eight gros, the difference was four-fifths. The 
crown of three livres in paper was then worth four-fifths less 
than the crown of three livres in silver. 

II. — Of the Proceedings of the Romans zvith respect to Money 

How great soever the exertion of authority had been in our 
times, with respect to the specie of France, during the admin- 
istration of two successive ministers, still it w^as vastly exceeded 
by the Romans ; not at the time when corruption had crept 
into their republic, nor when they were in a state of anarchy, 
but when they were as much by their wisdom as their courage 
in the full vigor of the constitution, after having conquered the 
cities of Italy, and at the very time that they disputed for em- 
pire with the Carthaginians. 

And here I am pleased that I have an opportunity of examin- 
ing more closely into this matter, that no example may be taken 
from what can never justly be called one. 

In the first Punic war the a.s,Q which ought to be twelve 
ounces of copper, weighed only two, and in the second it was 
no more than one. This retrenchment answers to what we now 
call the raising of coin. To take half the silver from a crown 
of six livres, in order to make two crowns, or to raise it to the 
value of twelve livres, is precisely the same thing. 

They have left us no monument of the manner in which the 
Romans conducted this affair in the first Punic war; but what 
they did in the second is a proof of the most consummate wis- 
dom. The republic found herself under an impossibility of 
paying her debts : the as weighed two ounces of copper, and 
the denarius, valued at ten ases, weighed twenty ounces of 

q Pliny's " Natural History," lib. XXXIII. art. 13. 



390 MONTESQUIEU 

copper. The republic, being willing to gain half on her credi- 
tors, made the as of an ounce of copper,'' and by this means 
paid the value of a denarius with ten ounces. This proceeding 
must have given a great shock to the state; they were obliged 
therefore to break the force of it as well as they could. It was 
in itself unjust, and it was necessary to render it as little so as 
possible. They had in view the deliverance of the republic with 
respect to the citizens ; they were not, therefore, obliged to 
direct their view to the deliverance of the citizens with respect 
to each other. This made a second step necessary. It was 
ordained that the denarius, which hitherto contained but ten 
ases, should contain sixteen. The result of this double opera- 
tion was, that while the creditors of the republic lost one-half,-^ 
those of individuals lost only a fifth ; t the price of merchandise 
was increased only a fifth ; the real change of the money was 
only a fifth. The other consequences are obvious. 

The Romans then conducted themselves with greater pru- 
dence than we, who in our transactions involved both the pub- 
lic treasure and the fortunes of individuals. But this is not all : 
their business was carried on amidst more favorable circum- 
stances than ours. 

12. — The C'u'cuuistances in wliich the Romans changed the 
Value of their Specie 

There was formerly very little gold and silver in Italy. This 
country has few or no mines of gold or silver. When Rome 
was taken by the Gauls, they found only a thousand-weight of 
gold." And yet the Romans had sacked many powerful cities, 
and brought home their wealth. For a long time they made use 
of none but copper money; and it was not till after the peace 
with Pyrrhus that they had silver enough to coin money : v they 
made denarii of this metal of the value of ten ases,a' or ten 
pounds of copper. At that time the proportion of silver was to 
that of copper as i to 960. For as the Roman denarius was 
valued at ten ases, or ten pounds of copper, it was worth one 
hundred and twenty ounces of copper ; and as the same denarius 

r Pliny's " Natural History," lib. u Pliny, lib. XXXIII. art. j. 

XXXIII. art. 13. V Freinshemius, lib. V. of the 2d 

s They received ten ounces of copper decad. 

for twenty. w Ibid. They struck also, says the 

t They received sixteen ounces of cop- same author, half-denarii, called quina- 

per for twenty. rii; and quarters, called sesterces. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 391 

was valued only at one-eighth of an ounce of silver,-*^ this pro- 
duced the above proportion. 

When Rome became mistress of that part of Italy which 
is nearest to Greece and Sicily, by degrees she found herself 
between two rich nations — the Greeks and the Carthaginians. 
Silver increased at Rome ; and as the proportion of i to 960 
between silver and copper could be no longer supported, she 
made several regulations with respect to money, which to us 
are unknown. However, at the beginning of the second Punic 
war the Roman denarius was worth no more than twenty 
ounces of copper ; y and thus the proportion between silver and 
copper was no longer but as i to 160. The reduction was very 
considerable, since the republic gained five-sixths upon all 
copper money. But she did only what was necessary in the 
nature of things, by establishing the proportion between the 
metals made use of as money. 

The peace which terminated the first Punic war left the 
Romans masters of Sicily. They soon entered Sardinia ; after- 
wards they began to know Spain ; and thus the quantity of 
silver increased at Rome. They took measures to reduce the 
denarius from twenty ounces to sixteen,.3 which had the effect 
of putting a nearer proportion between the silver and copper ; 
thus the proportion, which was before as i to 160, was now 
made as i to 128. 

If we examine into the conduct of the Romans, we shall 
never find them so great as in choosing a proper conjuncture 
for performing any extraordinary operation. 

13. — Proceedings with respect to Money in the Time of the 

Emperors 

In the changes made in the specie during the time of the re- 
public, they proceeded by diminishing it: in its wants, the 
state intrusted the knowledge to the people, and did not pre- 
tend to deceive them. Under the emperors, they proceeded by 
way of alloy. These princes, reduced to despair even by their 
liberalities, found themselves obliged to degrade the specie ; 
an indirect method, which diminished the evil without seeming 
to touch it. They withheld a part of the gift and yet concealed 

.r An eighth, accordinpr to Rud,Tus; y Pliny's "Nat. Hist." lib. XXXTII. 

according to other authors, a seventh. art. ij. s Ibid. 



392 MONTESQUIEU 

the hand that did it ; and, without speaking of the diminution 
of the pay, or of the gratuity, it was found diminished. 

We even still see in cabinets a kind of medals which are 
called plated, and are only pieces of copper covered with a thin 
plate of silver.o This money is mentioned in a fragment of the 
77th book of Dio.&amp; 

Didius Julian first began to debase it. We find that the coin 
of Caracalla c had an alloy of more than half ; that of Alexander 
Severus of two-thirds ; d the debasing still increased, till in the 
time of Gallienus nothing was to be seen but copper silvered 
over.t^ 

It is evident that such violent proceedings could not take 
place in the present age ; a prince might deceive himself, but 
he could deceive nobody else. The exchange has taught the 
banker to draw a comparison between all the money in the 
world, and to establish its just value. The standard of money 
can be no longer a secret. Were the prince to begin to alloy 
his silver, everybody else would continue it, and do it for him ; 
the specie of the true standard would go abroad first, and 
nothing would be sent back but base metal. If, like the Roman 
Emperors, he debased the silver without debasing the gold, the 
gold would suddenly disappear, and he would be reduced to 
his bad silver. The exchange, as I have said in the preceding 
book,^ has deprived princes of the opportunity of showing great 
exertions of authority, or at least has rendered them ineffectual. 

14. — How the Exchange is a Constraint on despotic Power 

Russia would have descended from its despotic power, but 
could not. The establishment of commerce depended on that 
of the exchange, and the transactions were inconsistent with all 
its laws. 

In 1745 the Czarina g made a law to expel the Jews, because 
they remitted into foreign countries the specie of those who 
were banished into Siberia, as well as that of the foreigners 
entertained in her service. As all the subjects of the empire 
are slaves, they can neither go abroad themselves nor send 

a See Father Joubert's " Science of 28th of July, on a discovery of fifty thou- 
Medals," Paris edit, of 1739, p. 59. sand medals. 

b " Extract of Virtues and Vices." d See " Savote," ibid. 

c See " Savote," part II. chap, xii., e Ibid, 

and " Le Journal des Savants " of the f Chap. 16. 

g Elizabeth, daughter of Peter I.— Ed. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 393 

away their effects without permission. The exchange which 
gives them the means of remitting their specie from one coun- 
try to another is, therefore, entirely incompatible with the laws 
of Russia. 

Commerce itself is inconsistent with the Russian laws. The 
people are composed only of slaves employed in agriculture, 
and of slaves called ecclesiastics or gentlemen, who are the 
lords of those slaves ; there is then nobody left for the third 
estate, which ought to be composed of mechanics and mer- 
chants. 

15. — The Practice of some Countries in Italy 

They have made laws in some part of Italy to prevent sub- 
jects from selling their lands, in order to remove their specie 
into foreign countries. These laws may be good, when the 
riches of a state are so connected with the country itself that 
there would be great difficulty in transferring them to another. 
But since, by the course of exchange, riches are in some degree 
independent of any particular state, and since they may with 
so much ease be conveyed from one country to another, that 
must be a bad law which will not permit persons for their own 
interest to dispose of their lands, while they can dispose of their 
money. It is a bad law, because it gives an advantage to mov- 
able effects, in prejudice to the land ; because it deters strang- 
ers from settlmg in the country ; and, in short, because it may 
be eluded. 

16. — The Assistance a State may derive from Bankers 

The banker's business is to change, not to lend, money./* 
If the prince makes use of them to change his specie, as he 
never does it but in great affairs, the least profit he can give 
for the remittance becomes considerable; agd if they demand 
large profits, wc may be certain that there is a fault in the ad- 
ministration. On the contrary, when they are employed to 
advance specie, their art consists in i)rocuring the greatest 
profit for the use of it, without being liable to be charged 
with usury. 

h The mistake here is apparent, bankers and money-changers being by no 
means identical.— Ed. 



394 MONTESQUIEU 

17.— Of Public Debts 

Some have imagined that it was for the advantage of a state 
to be indebted to itself : they thought that this multiplied riches 
by increasing the circulation. 

Those who are of this opinion have, I believe, confounded a 
circulating paper which represents money, or a circulating 
paper which is the sign of the profits that a company has or 
will make by commerce, with a paper which represents a debt. 
The first two are extremely advantageous to the state : the 
last can never be so ; and all that we can expect from it is, that 
individuals have a good security from the government for their 
money. But let us see the inconveniences which result from it. 

1. If foreigners possess much paper which represents a debt, 
they annually draw out of the nation a considerable sum for 
interest. 

2. In a nation that is thus perpetually in debt the exchange 
must be very low. 

3. The taxes raised for the payment of the interest of the 
debt are an injury to the manufactures, by raising the price of 
the artificer's labor. 

4. It takes the true revenue of the state from those who have 
activity and industry, to convey it to the indolent ; that is, it 
gives facilities for labor to those who do not work, and clogs 
with difficulties those who do work. 

These are its inconveniences : I know of no advantages. Ten 
persons have each a yearly income of a thousand crowns, either 
in land or trade ; this raises to the nation, at five per cent., a 
capital of two hundred thousand crowns. If these ten persons 
employed one-half of their income, that is, five thousand 
crowns, in paying the interest of a hundred thousand crowns, 
which they had borrowed of others, that still would be only 
to the state as two hundred thousand crowns ; that is, in the 
language of the algebraists, 200,000 crowns — 100,000 crowns 
+ 100,000 crowns = 200,000. 

People are thrown perhaps into this error by reflecting that 
the paper which represents the debt of a nation is the sign of 
riches ; for none but a rich state can support such paper with- 
out falling into decay. And if it does not fall, it is a proof that 
the state has other riches besides. They say that it is not an 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 395 

evil, because there are resources against it ; and that it is an 
advantage, since these resources surpass the evil. 

18.— 0/ the Payment of Public Debts 

It is necessary that there should be a proportion between the 
state as creditor and the state as debtor. The state may be 
a creditor to infinity, but it can only be a debtor to a certain 
degree, and when it surpasses that degree the title of creditor 
vanishes. 

If the credit of the state has never received the least blemish, 
it may do what has been so happily practised in one of the 
kingdoms of Europe; i that is, it may require a great quantity 
of specie, and ofTer to reimburse every individual, at least if they 
will not reduce their interest. When the state borrows, the 
individuals fix the interest ; when it pays, the interest for the 
future is fixed by the state. 

It is not sufficient to reduce the interest : it is necessary to 
erect a sinking-fund from the advantage of the reduction, in 
order to pay every year a part of the capital : a proceeding so 
happy that its success increases every day. 

When the credit of the state is not entire, there is a new rea- 
son for endeavoring to form a sinking-fund, because this fund 
being once established will soon procure the public confidence. 

1. If the state is a republic, the government of which is in its 
own nature consistent with its entering into projects of a long 
duration, the capital of the sinking-fund may be inconsiderable ; 
but it is necessary in a monarchy for the capital to be much 
greater. 

2. The regulations ought to be so ordered that all the sub- 
jects of the state may support the weight of the establishment 
of these funds, because they have all the weight of the estab- 
lishment of the debt ; thus the creditor of the state, by the sums 
he contributes, pays himself. 

3. There are four classes of men who pay the debts of the 
state : the proprietors of the land, those engaged in trade, 
the laborers and artificers, and, in fine, the annuitants either of 
the state or of private people. Of these four classes the last, 
in a case of necessity one would imagine, ought least to be 
spared, because it is a class entirely passive, while the state is 

t England. 



396 MONTESQUIEU 

supported by the active vigor of the other three. But as it can- 
not be higher taxed, without destroying the pubHc confidence, 
of which the state in general and these three classes in particular 
have the utmost need ; as a breach in the public faith cannot 
be made on a certain number of subjects without seeming to 
be made on all ; as the class of creditors is always the most ex- 
posed to the projects of ministers, and always in their eye, and 
under their immediate inspection, the state is obliged to give 
them a singular protection, that the part which is indebted may 
never have the least advantage over that which is the creditor. 

19. — Of lending upon Interest 

Specie is the sign of value. It is evident that he who has 
occasion for this sign ought to pay for the use of it as well as 
for everything else that he has occasion for. All the difference 
is, that other things may be either hired or bought ; whilst 
money, which is the price of things, can only be hired, and not 
bought./ 

To lend money without interest is certainly an action laud- 
able and extremely good ; but it is obvious that it is only a 
counsel of religion, and not a civil law. 

In order that trade may be successfully carried on, it is neces- 
sary that a price be fixed on the use of specie ; but this should 
be very inconsiderable. If it be too high, the merchant who 
sees that it will cost him more in interest than he can gain 
by commerce will undertake nothing ; if there is no considera- 
tion to be paid for the use of specie, nobody will lend it ; and 
here too the merchant will undertake nothing. 

I am mistaken when I say nobody will lend ; the affairs of 
society will ever make it necessary. Usury will be established, 
but with all the disorders with which it has been constantly 
attended. 

The laws of Mahomet confound usury with lending upon in- 
terest. Usury increases in Mahommedan countries in propor- 
tion to the severity of the prohibition. The lender indemnifies 
himself for the danger he undergoes of suffering the penalty. 

In those Eastern countries, the greater part of the people are 
secure in nothing ; there is hardly any proportion between the 
actual possession of a sum and the hopes of receiving it again 

;■ We do not speak here of gold and silver considered as a merchandise. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 397 

after having lent it : usury, then, must be raised in proportion 
to the danger of insolvency. 

20. — Of Maritime Usury 

The greatness of maritime usury is founded on two things : 
the danger of the sea, which makes it proper that those who 
expose their specie should not do it without considerable ad- 
vantage, and the ease with which the borrower, by means of 
commerce, speedily accomplishes a variety of great affairs. 
But usury, with respect to landmen, not being founded on either 
of these two reasons, is either prohibited by the legislators, or, 
what is more rational, reduced to proper bounds. 

21. — Of Lending by Contract, and the State of Usury among 

the Romans 

Besides the loans made for the advantage of commerce, there 
is still a kind of lending by a civil contract, whence results in- 
terest or usury. 

As the people of Rome increased every day in power, the 
magistrates sought to insinuate themselves in their favor by 
enacting such laws as were most agreeable to them. They re- 
trenched capitals ; they first lowered, and at length prohibited, 
interest ; they took away the power of confining the debtor's 
■ body ; in fine, the abolition of debts was contended for when- 
ever a tribune was disposed to render himself popular. 

These continual clianges, whether made by the laws or by 
the plebiscita, naturalized usury at Rome ; for the creditors, 
seeing the people their debtor, their legislator, and their judge, 
had no longer any confidence in their agreements : the people, 
like a debtor who has lost his credit, could only tempt them to 
lend by allov/ing an exorbitant interest,^' especially as the laws 
applied a remedy to the evil only from time to time, while the 
complaints of the people were continual, and constantly intimi- 
dated the creditors. This was the cause that all honest means 
of borrowing and lending were abolished at Rome, and that 
the most monstrous usury established itself in that city, not- 
withstanding the strict prohibition and severity of the law.' 
This evil was a consequence of the severity of the laws against 

k Cicero assures vis that in his day per cent., and forty-eight per cent, in 
noney was lent at Rome at thirty-four tlie country. — Ed. 

/Tacit. '• Annal." lib. VI. 



398 MONTESQUIEU 

usury. Laws excessively good are the source of excessive evil. 
The borrower found himself under the necessity of paying for 
the interest of the money, and for the danger the creditor under- 
went of suffering the penalty of the law. 

22. — The same Subject continued 

The primitive Romans had not any laws to regulate the rate 
of usury.'" In the contests which arose on this subject be- 
tween tiie plebeians and the patricians, even in the sedition on 
the Mons Sacer, nothing was alleged, on the one hand, but 
justice, and on the other, the severity of contracts.n 

They then only followed private agreements, which, I be- 
lieve, were most commonly at twelve per cent, per annum. 
My reason is, that in the ancient language of the Romans, in- 
terest at six per cent, was called half-usury, and interest at three 
per cent, quarter-usury.o Total usury must, therefore, have 
been interest at twelve per cent. 

But if it be asked how such great interest could be established 
among a people almost \vithout commerce, I answer that this 
, people, being very often obliged to go to war without pay, 
were under a frequent necessity of borrowing: and as they 
incessantly made happy expeditions, they were commonly well 
able to pay. This is visible from the recital of the contests 
which arose on this subject ; they did not then disagree con- 
cerning the avarice of creditors, but said that those who com- 
plained might have been able to pay, had they lived in a more 
regular manner./" 

They then made laws which had only an influence on the 
present situation of affairs: they ordained, for instance, that 
those who enrolled themselves for the war they were engaged 
in should not be molested by their creditors ; that those who 
were in prison should be set at liberty ; that the most indigent 
should be sent into the colonies ; and sometimes they opened 
the public treasury. The people, being eased of their present 
burdens, became appeased ; and as they required nothing for 
the future, the Senate was far from providing against it. 

m Usury and interest among the Ro- digests and codes on usury, and espe- 

mans signified the same thing. cially the 17th law, with the note ff. 

n See Dionysius Halicarnassus, who " de Usuris." 

has described it so well. p See Appius's speech on this subject, 

o " Usurae semisses, trientes, quad- in Dionysius Halicarnassus. 
rantes." See the several titles of the 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 



399 



At the time when the Senate maintained the cause of usury 
with so much constancy, the Romans were distinguished by an 
extreme love of frugahty, poverty, and moderation : but the 
constitution was such that the principal citizens alone sup- 
ported all the expenses of government, while the common peo- 
ple paid nothing. How, then, was it possible to deprive the 
former of the liberty of pursuing their debtors, and at the same 
time to oblige them to execute their offices, and to support the 
republic amidst its most pressing necessities ? 

Tacitus says that the law of the Twelve Tables fixed the in- 
terest at one per cent.9 It is evident that he was mistaken, and 
that 4ie took another law, of which I am going to speak, for 
the law of the Twelve Tables. If this had been regulated in the 
law of the Twelve Tables, why did they not make use of its 
authority in the disputes which afterwards arose between the 
creditors and debtors? We find no vestige of this law upon 
lending at interest ; and let us have ever so little knowledge 
of the history of Rome, we shall see that a law like this could 
not be the work of the Decemvirs. 

The Licinian law, made eighty-five years after that of the 
Twelve Tables,?' was one of those temporary regulations of 
which we have spoken. It ordained that what had been paid 
for interest should be deducted from the principal, and the rest 
discharged by three equal payments. 

In the year of Rome 398, the tributes Duellius and Menenius 
caused a law to be passed, which reduced the interest to one 
per cent, per annum. -y It is this law which Tacitus confounds 
with that of the Twelve Tables,' and this was the first ever made 
by the Romans to fix the rate of interest. Ten years after " 
this usury was reduced one-half,^' and in the end entirely 
abolished ; w and if we may believe some authors whom Livy 
had read, this was under the consulate of C. Martins Rutilius 
and O. Servilius, in the year of Rome 413.-1' 

It fared with this law as with all those in which the legislator 
carries things to excess : an infinite number of ways were 

q " Annal." lib. VI. to T. Liv. lib. VII. This is the law 

r In the year of Rome 379.— Tit. Liv. mentioned by Tacitus, "Annal." lil). 

lib. VI. VI. 

,9 " Unciaria iisura." — Tit. Liv. lib. ?■ " Semiunciaria usura." 

VII. See the " Defence of the Spirit of w As Tacitus says, "Annal." lib. VI. 

Laws," article " Usury." x This law was passed at the instance 

t " Annal." lib. VI. of M. denucius, Tribune of tlie people.— 

« Under the consulate of L. Manlius Tit. Liv. lib. VII., towards the end. 

Torquatus and C. Plautius, according 



400 MONTESQUIEU 

found to elude it. They enacted, therefore, many others to con- 
firm, correct, and temper it. Sometimes they quitted the laws 
to follow the common practice ; at others, the common practice 
to follow the laws ; but in this case, custom easily prevailed.3' 
When a man wanted to borrow, he found an obstacle in the very 
law made in his favor ; this law must be evaded by the person 
it was made to succor, and by the person condemned. Sem- 
pronius Asellus, the pretor, having permitted the debtors to 
act in conformity to the laws,- was slain by the creditors for 
attempting to revive the memory of a severity that could no 
longer be supported-^ 

I quit the city, in order to cast an eye on the provinces. 

I have somewhere else observed that the Roman provinces 
were exhausted by a severe and arbitrary government.^ But 
this is not all, they were also ruined by a most shocking usury. 

Cicero takes notice, that the inhabitants of Salamis wanted 
to borrow a sum of money at Rome, but could not, because of 
the Gabinian law.^ We must, therefore, inquire into the nature 
of this law. 

As soon as lending upon interest was forbidden at Rome, 
they contrived all sorts of means to elude the law ; d and as 
their allies,^ and the Latins, were not subject to the civil laws 
of the Romans, they employed a Latin, or an ally, to lend his 
name, and personate the creditor. The law, therefore, had only 
subjected the creditors to a matter of form, and the public were 
not relieved. 

The people complained of this artifice ; and Marius Sem- 
pronius, tribune of the people, by the authority of the Senate, 
caused a plebiscitum to be enacted to this purport, that in re- 
gard to loans the laws prohibiting usury between Roman citi- 
zens should equally take place between a citizen and an ally, 
or a citizen and a Latin. ^ 

At that time they gave the name of allies to the people of 
Italy properly so called, which extended as far as the Arno and 
the Rubicon, and was not governed in the form of a Roman 
province. 

y " Verteri jam more foenus receptum a In the year of Rome 663. 

erat."— Appian " on the Civil War," b Book XI. chap. 19. 

lib. I. c" Letters to Atticus," lib. V. ep. 21. 

s " Permisit eos legibus agere." — Ap- d Livy. 

pian "on the Civil War," lib. I.; and ^ Ibid, 

the " Epitome " of Livy, lib. LXIV. f In the year 559 of Rome. See Livy. 



THE SPIRIT OF LAWS 401 

It is an observation of Tacitus,g that new frauds were con- 
stantly committed, whenever any laws were passed for the pre- 
venting of usury. Finding themselves debarred from lending 
or borrowing in the name of an ally, they soon contrived to bor- 
row of some inhabitant of the provinces. 

To remedy this abuse they were obliged to enact a new law ; 
and Gabinius h upon the passing of that famous law, which 
was intended to prevent the corruption of suffrages, must 
naturally have reflected that the best way to attain his end was 
to discourage the lending upon interest: these were two ob- 
jects naturally connected ; for usury always increased at the 
time of elections,i because they stood in need of money to bribe 
the voters. It is plain that the Gabinian law had extended the 
senatus-consultum of Marcus Sempronius to the provinces, 
since the people of Salamis could not borrow money at Rome 
because of that very law. Brutus, under fictitious names, lent 
them some money / at four per cent, a month,^ and obtained 
for that purpose two scnatiis-considtums ; in the former of 
which it was expressly mentioned that this loan should not be 
considered as an evasion of the law,/ and that the Governor of 
Sicily should determine according to the stipulations men- 
tioned in the bond of the Salaminians. 

As lending upon interest was forbidden by the Gabinian law 
between provincials and Roman citizens, and the latter at that 
time had all the money of the globe in their hands, there was 
a necessity for tempting them with the bait of extravagant in- 
terest, to the end that the avaricious might thus lose sight 
of the danger of losing their money. And as they were men 
of great power in Rome, who awed the magistrates and over- 
ruled the laws, they were emboldened to lend and to extort 
great usury. Hence the provinces were successively ravaged 
by everyone who had any credit in Rome : and as each gov- 
ernor, at entering upon his province, published his edict »w 

p " Annal." lib. VI. / " Ut neque Salaminiis, ncque cui eis 

k Tn the year 615 of Rome. dedi.sset, fraudi esset." — Ibid. 

J See " Cicero to Atticus," lib. IV. ep. m Cicero's edict fixed it to one per 

IS and 16. cent, a month, with interest upon inter- 

y " Cicero to Atticus," lib. VI. ep. 10. est at the expiration of the year. With 

k Pompey having lent 600 talents to regard to the farmers of the rejiiiblic. 

King Ariobarzanes, made that prince he engaged them to grant a respite to 

pay him thirty Attic talents every thirty their &lt;lel)tors; if the latter did not pay 

days. — " Cic. ad Att." lilj. III. ep. 21, at the time fixed, he awarded the interest 

lib. VI. ep. II. nif-ntioned in the bond. — " Cic. ad Alt." 

lib. VI. cp. I. 

Vol. T.— 26 



402 MONTESQUIEU 

wherein he fixed the rate of interest in what manner he pleased, 
the legislature played into the hands of avarice, and the latter 
served the mean purposes of the legislator. 

But the public business must be carried on ; and wherever a 
total inaction obtains, the state is undone. On some occasions 
the towns, the corporate bodies and societies, as well as private 
people, were under the necessity of borrowing — a necessity but 
too urgent, were it only to repair the ravages of armies, the 
rapacity of magistrates, the extortions of collectors, and the 
corrupt practices daily introduced ; for never was there at one 
period so much poverty and opulence. The Senate, being pos- 
sessed of the executive power, granted, through necessity, and 
oftentimes through favor, a permission of borrowing from 
Roman citizens, so as to enact decrees for that particular pur- 
pose. But even these decrees were discredited by the law ; for 
they might give occasion to the people's insisting upon new 
rates of interest, which would augment the danger of losing the 
capital, while they made a further extension of usury." I shall 
ever repeat it, that mankind are governed not by extremes, but 
by principles of moderation. 

He pays least, says Ulpian, who pays latest.^ This decides 
the question whether interest be lawful; that is, whether the 
creditor can sell time, and the debtor buy it. 

n See what Lucretius says, in the to fix the rate of interest at one per cent 
" 2ist letter to Atticus," lib. V. There per month. See the same letter, 
was even a general senatus-consultum, o Leg. 12 ff. " de verb, signif." 



UC SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 

mil III 




lllliiiil ji.ii 

AA 000 246 389 i 




i|li|iii|iiiiji' 



.iiiliilpiiiiiiiiji 




